$NetBSD: podules,v 1.18 2009/01/21 14:31:04 jnemeth Exp $

/*
 * Copyright (c) 1996 Mark Brinicombe
 * All rights reserved.
 *
 * Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 * modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 * are met:
 * 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
 * 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
 *    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
 *    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
 * 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
 *    must display the following acknowledgement:
 *      This product includes software developed by Mark Brinicombe
 *	for the NetBSD Project.
 * 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
 *    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
 *
 * THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
 * IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
 * OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
 * IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
 * INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
 * NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
 * DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
 * THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
 * (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
 * THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
 */

/*
 * Use "make -f Makefile.podules" to regenerate podules.h and podule_data.h
 */

/*
 * List of known podule manufacturers
 */

manufacturer	ACORN		0x0000	Acorn Computers
manufacturer	ACORNUSA	0x0001	Acorn Computers (USA)
manufacturer	OLIVETTI	0x0002	Olivetti
manufacturer	WATFORD		0x0003	Watford Electronics
manufacturer	CCONCEPTS	0x0004	Computer Concepts
manufacturer	IINTERFACES	0x0005	Intelligent Interfaces
manufacturer	CAMAN		0x0006	Caman
manufacturer	ARMADILLO	0x0007	Armadillo Systems
manufacturer	SOFTOPTION	0x0008	Soft Option
manufacturer	WILDVISION	0x0009	Wild Vision
manufacturer	ANGLOCOMPUTERS	0x000a	Anglo Computers
manufacturer	RESOURCE	0x000b	Resource
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_COMPANY_ALLIEDINTERACTIVE 12 */
manufacturer	HCCS		0x000c	HCCS
manufacturer	MUSBURYCONSULT	0x000d	Musbury Consultants
manufacturer	GNOME		0x000e	Gnome
manufacturer	AANDGELEC	0x000f	A and G Electronics
manufacturer	SPACETECH	0x0010	Spacetech
manufacturer	ATOMWIDE	0x0011	Atomwide
manufacturer	SYNTEC		0x0012	Syntec
manufacturer	EMR		0x0013	ElectroMusic Research
manufacturer	MILLIPEDE	0x0014	Millipede
manufacturer	VIDEOELEC	0x0015	Video Electronics
manufacturer	BRAINSOFT	0x0016	Brainsoft
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_COMPANY_ASP 23 */
manufacturer	ATOMWIDE2	0x0017	Atomwide
manufacturer	LENDAC		0x0018	Lendac Data Systems
manufacturer	CAMMICROSYS	0x0019	Cambridge Micro Systems
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_COMPANY_JOHNBALANCECOMPUTING 26 */
manufacturer	LINGENUITY	0x001a	Lingenuity
manufacturer	SIPLAN		0x001b	Siplan Electronics Research
manufacturer	SCIFRONTIERS	0x001c	Science Frontiers
manufacturer	PINEAPPLE	0x001d	Pineapple Software
manufacturer	TECHNOMATIC	0x001e	Technomatic
manufacturer	IRLAM		0x001f	Irlam Instruments
manufacturer	NEXUS		0x0020	Nexus Electronics
manufacturer	OAK		0x0021	Oak Solutions
manufacturer	HUGHSYMONS	0x0022	Hugh Symons
manufacturer	BEEBUG		0x0023	BEEBUG (RISC Developments)
manufacturer	TEKNOMUSIK	0x0024	Teknomusik
manufacturer	REELTIME	0x0025	Reel Time
manufacturer	PRES		0x0026	PRES
manufacturer	DIGIHURST	0x0027	Digihurst
manufacturer	SGBCOMPSERV	0x0028	SGB Computer Services
manufacturer	SJ		0x0029	SJ Research
manufacturer	PHOBOX		0x002a	Phobox Electronics
manufacturer	MORLEY		0x002b	Morley Electronics
manufacturer	RACINGCAR	0x002c	Raching Car Computers
manufacturer	HCCS2		0x002d	HCCS
manufacturer	LINDIS		0x002e	Lindis International
manufacturer	CCC		0x002f	Computer Control Consultants
manufacturer	UNILAB		0x0030	Unilab
manufacturer	SEFANFROHLING	0x0031	Sefan Frohling
manufacturer	ROMBO		0x0032	Rombo Productions
manufacturer	3SL		0x0033	3SL
manufacturer	DELTRONICS	0x0034	Deltronics
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_COMPANY_PCARNOLDTECHNICALSERVICES 53 */
manufacturer	VTI		0x0035	Vertical Twist
manufacturer	SIMIS		0x0036	Simis
manufacturer	DTSOFT		0x0037	D.T. Software
manufacturer	ARMINTERFACES	0x0038	ARM Interfaces
manufacturer	BIA		0x0039	BIA
manufacturer	CUMANA		0x003a	Cumana
manufacturer	IOTA		0x003b	Iota
manufacturer	ICS		0x003c	Ian Copestake Software
manufacturer	BAILDON		0x003d	Baildon Electronics
manufacturer	CSD		0x003e	CSD
manufacturer	SERIALPORT	0x003f	Serial Port
manufacturer	CADSOFT		0x0040	CADsoft
manufacturer	ARXE		0x0041	ARXE
manufacturer	ALEPH1		0x0042	Aleph 1
manufacturer	ICUBED		0x0046	I-Cubed
manufacturer	BRINI		0x0050	Brini
manufacturer	ANT		0x0053	ANT
manufacturer	CASTLE		0x0055	Castle Technology
manufacturer	ALSYSTEMS	0x005b	Alsystems
manufacturer	SIMTEC		0x005f	Simtec Electronics
manufacturer	YES		0x0060	Yellowstone Educational Solutions
manufacturer	MCS		0x0063	MCS
manufacturer	EESOX		0x0064	EESOX

/*
 * List of known podules.
 */

podule	HOSTTUBE		0x0000	Host TUBE (to BBC)
podule	PARASITETUBE		0x0001	Parastite TUBE (to 2nd processor)
podule	ACORN_SCSI		0x0002	Acorn SCSI interface
podule	ETHER1			0x0003	Ether1 interface
podule	IBMDISC			0x0004	IBM disc
podule	ROMRAM			0x0005	ROM/RAM podule
podule	BBCIO			0x0006	BBC I/O podule
podule	FAXPACK			0x0007	FaxPack modem
podule	TELETEXT		0x0008	Teletext
podule	CDROM			0x0009	CD-ROM
podule	IEEE488			0x000a	IEEE 488 interface
podule	ST506			0x000b	ST506 HD interface
podule	ESDI			0x000c	ESDI interface
podule	SMD			0x000d	SMD interface
podule	LASERPRINTER		0x000e	laser printer
podule	SCANNER			0x000f	scanner
podule	FASTRING		0x0010	Fast Ring interface
podule	FASTRING2		0x0011	Fast Ring II interface
podule	PROMPROGRAMMER		0x0012	PROM programmer
podule	ACORN_MIDI		0x0013	MIDI interface
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_MONOVPU 20 */
podule	LASERDIRECT		0x0014	LaserDirect (Canon LBP-4)
podule	FRAMEGRABBER		0x0015	frame grabber
podule	A448			0x0016	A448 sound sampler
podule	VIDEODIGITISER		0x0017	video digitiser
podule	GENLOCK			0x0018	genlock
podule	CODECSAMPLER		0x0019	codec sampler
podule	IMAGEANALYSER		0x001a	image analyser
podule	ANALOGUEINPUT		0x001b	analogue input
podule	CDSOUNDSAMPLER		0x001c	CD sound sampler
podule	6MIPSSIGPROC		0x001d	6 MIPS signal processor
podule	12MIPSSIGPROC		0x001e	12 MIPS signal processor
podule	33MIPSSIGPROC		0x001f	33 MIPS signal processor
podule	TOUCHSCREEN		0x0020	touch screen
podule	TRANSPUTERLINK		0x0021	Transputer link
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_INTERACTIVEVIDEO 34 */
podule	HCCS_IDESCSI		0x0022	HCCS IDE or SCSI interface
podule	LASERSCANNER		0x0023	laser scanner
podule	GNOME_TRANSPUTERLINK	0x0024	Transputer link
podule	VMEBUS			0x0025	VME bus interface
podule	TAPESTREAMER		0x0026	tape streamer
podule	LASERTEST		0x0027	laser test
podule	COLOURDIGITISER		0x0028	colour digitiser
podule	WEATHERSATELLITE	0x0029	weather satellite
podule	AUTOCUE			0x002a	autocue
podule	PARALLELIO16BIT		0x002b	16-bit parallel I/O
podule	12BITATOD		0x002c	12-bit ADC
podule	SERIALPORTSRS423	0x002d	RS423 serial ports
podule	MINI			0x002e	mini
podule	FRAMEGRABBER2		0x002f	frame grabber II
podule	INTERACTIVEVIDEO2	0x0030	interactive video II
podule	WILDVISION_ATOD		0x0031	ADC
podule	WILDVISION_DTOA		0x0032	DAC
podule	EMR_MIDI4		0x0033	MIDI 4
podule	FPCP			0x0034	floating-point co-processor
podule	PRISMA3			0x0035	Prisma 3
podule	ARVIS			0x0036	ARVIS
podule	4BY4MIDI		0x0037	4x4 MIDI
podule	BISERIALPARALLEL	0x0038	Bi-directional serial/parallel
podule	CHROMA300		0x0039	Chroma 300 genlock
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_CHROMA400GENLOCK 58 */
podule	CUMANA_SCSI2		0x003a	SCSI II interface
podule	COLOURCONVERTER		0x003b	Colour Converter
podule	8BITSAMPLER		0x003c	8-bit sampler
podule	PLUTO			0x003d	Pluto interface
podule	LOGICANALYSER		0x003e	Logic Analyser
podule	ACORN_USERMIDI		0x003f	User Port/MIDI interface
podule	LINGENUITY_SCSI8	0x0040	8 bit SCSI interface
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_SIPLANADCANDDAC 65 */
podule	ARXE_SCSI		0x0041	16 bit SCSI interface
podule	DUALUSERPORT		0x0042	dual User Port
podule	EMR_SAMPLER8		0x0043	Sampler8
podule	EMR_SMTP		0x0044	SMTP
podule	EMR_MIDI2		0x0045	MIDI2
podule	PINEAPPLE_DIGITISER	0x0046	digitiser
podule	VIDEOFRAMECAPTURE	0x0047	video frame capture
podule	MONOOVERLAYFRSTORE	0x0048	mono overlay frame store
podule	MARKETBUFFER		0x0049	market buffer
podule	PAGESTORE		0x004a	page store
podule	TRAMMOTHERBOARD		0x004b	TRAM motherboard
podule	TRANSPUTER		0x004c	Transputer
podule	OPTICALSCANNER		0x004d	optical scanner
podule	DIGITISINGTABLET	0x004e	digitising tablet
podule	200DPISCANNER		0x004f	200-dpi scanner
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_DIGITALIO 80 */
podule	COLOURCARD		0x0050	ColourCard
podule	PRESENTERGENLOCK	0x0051	Presenter Genlock
podule	HAWKV9			0x0052	Hawk v9 mark2
podule	CROMA200		0x0053	Chroma 200 genlock
podule	WILDVISION_SOUNDSAMPLER	0x0054	Wild Vision Sound Sampler
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_SMTPEINTERFACE 85 */
podule	DTSOFT_IDE		0x0055	IDE interface
podule	8BITATOD		0x0056	8-bit ADC
podule	MFMHDCONTROLLER		0x0057	MFM hard disc controller
/* XXX ID 0x0058 is used by Oak ClassNet (EtherO) Ethernet cards */
podule	OAK_SCSI		0x0058	16 bit SCSI interface
podule	QUADSERIAL		0x0059	quad serial
podule	PALPROGRAMMER		0x005a	PAL programmer
podule	I2CBUS			0x005b	I^2C bus
podule	BEEBUG_SCANNER		0x005c	scanner interface
podule	PANDORA_QUADMIDI	0x005d	quad MIDI
podule	PRES_DISCBUFFER		0x005e	disc buffer
podule	PRES_USERPORT		0x005f	User Port
podule	MICROYEAI		0x0060	Micro YEAI
podule	ETHER2			0x0061	Ether2 interface
podule	SGB_EXPANSIONBOX	0x0062	SGB expansion box
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_SGBFASTPORT 99 */
podule	ULTIMATE		0x0063	Ultimate micropodule carrier
podule	NEXUS			0x0064	Nexus interface (Podule)
podule	PHOBOX_USERANALOGUE	0x0065	User and Analogue ports
podule	MORLEY_STATICRAM	0x0066	static RAM
podule	MORLEY_SCSI		0x0067	SCSI interface
podule	MORLEY_TELETEXT		0x0068	teletext interface
podule	TECHNOMATIC_SCANNER	0x0069	scanner
podule	BEEBUG_QUADRANT		0x006a	Quadrant
podule	RCC_VOICEPROCESSOR	0x006b	voice processor
podule	RCC_UHFLINK		0x006c	UHF link
podule	MORLEY_USERANALOGUE	0x006d	User and Analogue ports
podule	HCCS_USERANALOGUE	0x006e	User and Analogue ports
podule	WILDVISION_CENTRONICS	0x006f	Bi-directional Centronics
podule	HCCS_A3000SCSI		0x0070	A3000 SCSI interface
podule	LINDIS_DIGITISER	0x0071	digitiser
podule	CCC_PEAKPROGMETER	0x0072	peak prog. meter
podule	LASERLIGHTCONTROL	0x0073	laser light control
podule	HARDDISCINTERFACE	0x0074	hard disc interface
podule	EXTRAMOUSE		0x0075	extra mouse
podule	STEBUSINTERFACE		0x0076	STE bus interface
podule	MORLEY_ST506		0x0077	ST506 disc interface
podule	BRAINSOFT_MULTI1	0x0078	Multi_1
podule	BRAINSOFT_MULTI2	0x0079	Multi_2
podule	BRAINSOFT_24DIGITISER	0x007a	24-bit digitiser
podule	BRAINSOFT_24GRAPHICS	0x007b	24-bit graphics
podule	SYNTEC_SPECTRON		0x007c	Spectron
podule	SYNTEC_QUAD16DTOA	0x007d	Quad 16-bit DAC
podule	ROMBO_4BITDIGIISER	0x007e	4-bit digitiser
podule	DONGLEANDKEYPAD		0x007f	dongle and keypad
podule	3SL_SCSI		0x0080	SCSI interface
podule	ARMADILLO_BTM1		0x0081	BTM1
podule	ARMADILLO_DSO1		0x0082	DSO1
podule	DELTRONICS_USER		0x0083	User Port
podule	JPEGCOMPRESSOR		0x0084	JPEG compressor
podule	BEEBUG_A3000SCSI	0x0085	A3000 SCSI
podule	BEEBUG_COLOURSCAN	0x0086	colour scanner interface
podule	EXTENSIONROM		0x0087	extension ROM
podule	GRAPHICSENHANCER	0x0088	Graphics Enhancer
podule	SIMIS_AFB300		0x0089	AFB300
podule	FAXPACKSENIOR		0x008a	FaxPack Senior
podule	FAXPACKJUNIOR		0x008b	FaxPack Junior
podule	LINGENUITY_SCSI8SHARE	0x008c	8 bit SCSIShare interface
podule	VTI_SCSI		0x008d	SCSI interface
podule	ATOMWIDE_PIA		0x008e	PIA
podule	NEXUSNS			0x008f	Nexus interface (A3020/RiscPC netslot)
/* RISC iX: #define XCB_PRODUCT_XCB_DTSOFTWAREPCCONNECT 144 */
podule	ATOMWIDE_SERIAL		0x0090	multiport serial interface
podule	WATFORD_IDE		0x0091	IDE interface
podule	ATOMWIDE_IDE		0x0092	IDE interface
podule	ARMADILLO_RSI		0x0093	RSI
podule	ARMADILLO_TCR		0x0094	TCR
podule	LINGENUITY_SCSI		0x0095	16 bit SCSI interface
podule	LINGENUITY_SCSISHARE	0x0096	16 bit SCSIShare interface
podule	BEEBUG_IDE		0x0097	IDE interface
podule	WATFORD_PRISMRT		0x0098	Prism RT
podule	HCCS_VIDEODIGITISER	0x0099	video digitiser
podule	DTSOFT_SCANPORT		0x009a	ScanPort
podule	DTSOFT_PACCEL		0x009b	Paccel
podule	DTSOFT_CANONION		0x009c	Canon ION interface
podule	BIA_AUDIO		0x009d	BIA audio
podule	IRLAM_FAXIM		0x009e	FaxIm
podule	IRLAM_MOVINGIMAGE	0x009f	Moving Image
podule	CUMANA_SCSI1		0x00a0	SCSI I interface
podule	NEXUS_A3000ETHERNET	0x00a1	A3000 Ethernet
podule	NEXUS_PCEMACCELL	0x00a2	PC Emulator accelerator
podule	NEXUS_64CANSERIAL	0x00a3	64-channel serial
podule	ETHER3			0x00a4	Ether3/Ether5 interface
podule	IOTA_SCANNER		0x00a5	scanner interface
podule	NEXUS_I860MATHACCELL	0x00a6	i860 floating-point accelerator
podule	II_QUADSERIAL		0x00a7	quad serial port
podule	WATFORD_SCANNERGREY	0x00a8	grey-scale scanner
podule	WATFORD_SCANNERRGB	0x00a9	RGB scanner
podule	WATFORD_PRISMCOLOUR	0x00aa	Prism Colour
podule	WATFORD_USERANALOGUE	0x00ab	Analogue and User Ports
podule	BAILDON_DISCBUFFER	0x00ac	disc buffer
podule	BAILDON_A3000UPBUS	0x00ad	A3000 UP bus
podule	ICS_IDE			0x00ae	IDE Interface
podule	HCCS_BWDIGITISER	0x00af	b/w digitiser
podule	CSD_IDE8		0x00b0	8-bit IDE interface
podule	CSD_IDE16		0x00b1	16-bit IDE interface
podule	SERIALPORT_IDE		0x00b2	IDE interface
podule	SERIALPORT_4MFLOPPY	0x00b3	4 MB floppy
podule	CADSOFT_MAESTROINTER	0x00b4	Maestro Inter
podule	ARXE_QUADFS		0x00b5	Quad-density floppy interface
podule	SERIALPORT_DUALSERIAL	0x00b9	Serial interface
podule	ETHERLAN200		0x00bd	EtherLan 200-series
podule	SCANLIGHTV256		0x00cb	ScanLight Video 256
podule	EAGLEM2			0x00cc	Eagle M2
podule	LARKA16			0x00ce	Lark A16
podule	ETHERLAN100		0x00cf	EtherLan 100-series
podule	ETHERLAN500		0x00d4	EtherLan 500-series
podule	ETHERM			0x00d8	EtherM dual interface NIC
podule	CUMANA_SLCD		0x00dd	CDFS & SLCD expansion card
podule	BRINILINK		0x00df	BriniLink transputer link adapter
podule	ETHERB			0x00e4	EtherB network slot interface
podule	24I16			0x00e6	24i16 digitiser
podule	PCCARD			0x00ea	PC card
podule	ETHERLAN600		0x00ec	EtherLan 600-series
podule	CASTLE_SCSI16SHARE	0x00f3  8 or 16 bit SCSI2Share interface
podule	CASTLE_ETHERSCSISHARE	0x00f4  8 or 16 bit SCSI2Share interface, possibly with Ethernet
podule	CASTLE_ETHERSCSI	0x00f5  EtherSCSI
podule	CASTLE_SCSI16		0x00f6  8 or 16 bit SCSI2 interface
podule	ALSYSTEMS_SCSI		0x0107	SCSI II host adapter
podule	RAPIDE			0x0114	RapIDE32 interface
podule	ETHERLAN100AEH		0x011c	AEH77 (EtherLan 102)
podule	ETHERLAN200AEH		0x011d	AEH79 (EtherLan 210)
podule	ETHERLAN600AEH		0x011e	AEH62/78/99 (EtherLan 602)
podule	ETHERLAN500AEH		0x011f	AEH75 (EtherLan 512)
podule	CONNECT32		0x0125	Connect32 SCSI II interface
podule	CASTLE_SCSI32		0x012b  32 bit SCSI2 + DMA interface
podule	ETHERLAN700AEH		0x012e	AEH98 (EtherLan 700-series)
podule	ETHERLAN700		0x012f	EtherLan 700-series
podule	SIMTEC_IDE8		0x0130	8 bit IDE interface
podule	SIMTEC_IDE		0x0131	16 bit IDE interface
podule	MIDICONNECT		0x0133	Midi-Connect
podule	ETHERI			0x0139	EtherI interface
podule	SIMTEC_USB		0x0145	USB interface
podule	SIMTEC_NET100		0x0150	NET100 interface
podule	MIDIMAX			0x0200	MIDI max
podule	MMETHERV		0x1234	Multi-media/EtherV
podule	ETHERN			0x5678	EtherN interface
