.\"	$NetBSD: statvfs.5,v 1.10 2008/06/23 04:22:36 dholland Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)statfs.2	8.5 (Berkeley) 5/24/95
.\"
.Dd June 23, 2008
.Dt STATVFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm statvfs
.Nd file system statistics
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/statvfs.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Aq Pa sys/statvfs.h
header defines the structures and functions that
return information about a mounted file system.
The
.Nm statvfs
structure is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal

struct statvfs {
	unsigned long	f_bsize;  /* system block size */
	unsigned long	f_frsize; /* system fragment size */

	fsblkcnt_t	f_blocks; /* number of blocks in file system */
	fsblkcnt_t	f_bfree;  /* free blocks avail in file system */
	fsblkcnt_t	f_bavail; /* free blocks avail to non-root */

	fsfilcnt_t	f_files;  /* total file nodes in file system */
	fsfilcnt_t	f_ffree;  /* free file nodes in file system */
	fsfilcnt_t	f_favail; /* free file nodes avail to non-root */

	unsigned long	f_fsid;   /* File system ID */

	unsigned long	f_flag;	  /* flags */

	unsigned long	f_namemax;/* maximum filename length */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa f_flag
argument can have the following bits set:
.Bl -tag -width ST_SYNCHRONOUS
.It Dv ST_RDONLY
The filesystem is mounted read-only;
Even the super-user may not write on it.
.It Dv ST_NOSUID
Setuid and setgid bits on files are not honored when they are executed.
.It Dv ST_NOTRUNC
File names longer than NAME_MAX are not truncated.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr statvfs 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Aq Pa sys/statvfs.h
header first appeared in
.Nx 3.0 .
