.TH TZ 5
.SH NAME
TZ \- Time zone environment variable
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBTZ=\fIzone\fR[\fB\-\fR]\fIoffset\fR[\fIdst\fR[\fIoffset\fR][\fB,\fIstart\fR[\fB/\fItime\fR]\fB,\fIend\fR[\fB/\fItime\fR]]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.de SP
.if t .sp 0.4
.if n .sp
..
The
.B TZ
environment variable tells functions such as the
.BR ctime (3)
family and programs like
.B date
what the time zone and daylight saving rule is.  The value of
.B TZ
has the \s-2POSIX\s+2 standardized form shown in the synopsis.  This form
specifies the zone names, offsets from GMT, and daylight saving changeover
times for at least the current year.
.TP
.I zone
A three or more letter name for the time zone in normal (winter) time.
.TP
.BI [\-] offset
A signed time telling the offset of the time zone westwards from Greenwich.
The time has the form
.I hh[:mm[:ss]]
with a one of two digit hour, and optional two digit minutes and seconds.
.TP
.I dst
The name of the time zone when daylight saving is in effect.  It may
be followed by an offset telling how big the clock correction is other than
the default of 1 hour.
.TP
\fIstart\fR/\fItime\fR,\fIend\fR/\fItime\fR
Specifies the start and end of the daylight saving period.  The
.I start
and
.I end
fields indicate on what day the changeover occurs.  They must be in one of
the following formats:
.SP
.ta +5
.in +5
.ti -5
\fBJ\fIn\fR	The Julian day
.I n
(1 <=
.I n
<= 365) ignoring leap days, i.e. there is no February 29.
.SP
.ti -5
\fIn\fR	The zero-based Julian day
(0 <=
.I n
<= 365).  Leap days are not ignored.
.SP
.ti -5
.BI M m . n . d
.br
This indicates month
.IR m ,
the
.IR n -th
occurrence of day
.I d
(1 <=
.I m
<= 12, 1 <=
.I n
<= 5, 0 <=
.I d
<= 6, 0=Sunday).  The 5-th occurrence means the last occurrence of that day
in a month.  So
.B M4.1.0
is the first Sunday in April,
.B M9.5.0
is the last Sunday in September.
.in -5
.SP
The
.I time
field indicates the time the changeover occurs on the given day.
.SH EXAMPLES
Greenwich Mean Time:
.PP
.RS
.B TZ=GMT0
.RE
.PP
Central European Time, 1 hour east from Greenwich, daylight saving starts on
the last Sunday in March at 2 AM and ends on the last Sunday in October
at 3 AM:
.PP
.RS
.B TZ='CET\-1CEST,M3.5.0/2,M10.5.0/3'
.RE
.PP
British time, daylight saving starts and ends at the same moment as CET,
but in an earlier time zone:
.PP
.RS
.B TZ=GMT0BST,M3.5.0/1,M10.5.0/2
.RE
.PP
The eastern european time zones also have the changeovers at the same
absolute time as British time and CET.
.PP
U.S. Eastern Standard Time, 5 hours west from Greenwich, daylight saving
starts on the first Sunday in April at 2 AM and ends on the last Sunday in
October at 2 AM:
.PP
.RS
.B TZ=EST5EDT,M4.1.0/2,M10.5.0/2
.RE
.PP
It shouldn't surprise you that daylight saving in New Zealand is observed
in the months opposite from the previous examples.  It starts on the first
Sunday in October at 2 AM and ends on the third Sunday in March at 3 AM:
.PP
.RS
.B TZ=NZST\-12NZDT,M10.1.0/2,M3.3.0/3
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR readclock (8),
.BR date (1).
.SH BUGS
You may have noticed that many fields are optional.  Do no omit them,
because the defaults are bogus.  If you need daylight saving then fully
specify the changeovers.
.PP
West is negative, east is positive, ask any sailor.
.PP
Next year's time zone and daylight saving time are determined by politicians.
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
