.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1983, 1986, 1991, 1993
.\"     The Regents of the University of California. 
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)intro.2	8.5 (Berkeley) 2/27/95
.\"
.\" Adapted to MINIX 3 
.\"
.Dd July 14, 2010
.Dt INTRO 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm intro ,
.Nm errno
.Nd introduction to system calls and error numbers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In errno.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This section provides an overview of the system calls,
their error returns, and other common definitions and concepts.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
Nearly all of the system calls provide an error number in the external
variable
.Va errno .
.Pp
When a system call detects an error,
it returns an integer value
indicating failure (usually \-1)
and sets the variable
.Va errno
accordingly.
(This allows interpretation of the failure on receiving
a \-1 and to take action accordingly.)
Successful calls never set
.Va errno ;
once set, it remains until another error occurs.
It should only be examined after an error has been reported, because
otherwise a leftover value from some previous error may be found
instead.
.Po
Many library functions that are not system calls also set
.Va errno
on return, in the same fashion.
In these cases a nonzero value may be left in
.Va errno
even upon successful return if some internal action failed.
.Pc
.Pp
The manual page for each system call will list some of the common
errno codes that system call can return, but that should not be
considered an exhaustive list, i.e.
a properly written program should be able to gracefully recover from
any error that a system call might return.
Documenting all the error codes that a system call can return in
a more specification-like manner would take more resources than
this project has available.
.Pp
Note also that a number of system calls overload the meanings of these
error numbers, and that in these cases the meanings must be
interpreted according to the type and circumstances of the call.
.Pp
The following is a list of the errors and their
names as given in
.In errno.h .
.Bl -hang -width Ds
.It Er 0 OK Em "Error 0" .
Not used.  (The symbol "OK" is only used inside the kernel source.)
.It 1 EPERM Em "Operation not permitted" .
An attempt was made to perform an operation limited to processes
with appropriate privileges or to the owner of a file or other
resources.
.It Er 2 ENOENT Em "No such file or directory" .
A component of a specified pathname did not exist, or the
pathname was an empty string.
.It Er 3 ESRCH Em "No such process" .
No process could be found corresponding to that specified by the given
process ID.
It Er 4 EINTR Em "Interrupted function call" .
An asynchronous signal (such as
.Dv SIGINT
or
.Dv SIGQUIT )
was caught by the process during the execution of an interruptible
function.
If the signal handler performs a normal return, the
interrupted function call will seem to have returned the error condition.
.It Er 5 EIO Em "Input/output error" .
Some physical input or output error occurred.
This error will not be reported until a subsequent operation on the same file
descriptor and may be lost (over written) by any subsequent errors.
.It Er 6 ENXIO Em "Device not configured" .
Input or output on a special file referred to a device that did not
exist, or
made a request beyond the limits of the device.
This error may also occur when, for example,
a tape drive is not online or no disk pack is
loaded on a drive.
.It Er 7 E2BIG Em "Arg list too long" .
The number of bytes used for the argument and environment
list of the new process exceeded the current limit of
262144 bytes
.Pf ( Dv ARG_MAX
in
.In limits.h ) .
.It Er 8 ENOEXEC Em "Exec format error" .
A request was made to execute a file
that, although it has the appropriate permissions,
was not in the format required for an
executable file.
.It Er 9 EBADF Em "Bad file descriptor" .
A file descriptor argument was out of range, referred to no open file,
or a
.Xr read 2
(or
.Xr write 2 )
request was made to a file that was
only open for writing (or reading).
.It Er 10 ECHILD Em "\&No child processes" .
A
.Xr wait 2
or
.Xr waitpid 2
function was executed by a process that had no existing or unwaited-for
child processes.
.It Er 11 EAGAIN Em "Resource temporarily unavailable" .
This is a temporary condition and later calls to the
same routine may complete normally.
.It Er 12 ENOMEM Em "Cannot allocate memory" .
The new process image required more memory than was allowed by the hardware
or by system-imposed memory management constraints.
Soft limits may be increased to their corresponding hard limits.
.It Er 13 EACCES Em "Permission denied" .
An attempt was made to access a file in a way forbidden
by its file access permissions.
.It Er 14 EFAULT Em "Bad address" .
The system detected an invalid address in attempting to
use an argument of a call.
The reliable detection of this error cannot be guaranteed and when not detected
may result in the generation of a signal, indicating an address violation,
which is sent to the process.
.It Er 15 ENOTBLK Em "Block device required" .
A block device operation was attempted on a non-block device or file.
.It Er 16 EBUSY Em "Resource busy" .
An attempt to use a system resource which was in use at the time
in a manner which would have conflicted with the request.
.It Er 17 EEXIST Em "File exists" .
An existing file was mentioned in an inappropriate context,
for instance, as the new link name in a
.Xr link 2
function.
.It Er 18 EXDEV Em "Improper link" .
A hard link to a file on another file system
was attempted.
.It Er 19 ENODEV Em "Operation not supported by device" .
An attempt was made to apply an inappropriate
function to a device,
for example,
trying to read a write-only device such as a printer.
.It Er 20 ENOTDIR Em "Not a directory" .
A component of the specified pathname existed, but it was
not a directory, when a directory was expected.
.It Er 21 EISDIR Em "Is a directory" .
An attempt was made to open a directory with write mode specified.
.It Er 22 EINVAL Em "Invalid argument" .
Some invalid argument was supplied.
(For example, specifying an undefined signal to a
.Xr signal 3
or
.Xr kill 2
function).
.It Er 23 ENFILE Em "Too many open files in system" .
Maximum number of file descriptors allowable on the system
has been reached and a requests for an open cannot be satisfied
until at least one has been closed.
.It Er 24 EMFILE Em "Too many open files" .
\*[Lt]As released, the limit on the number of
open files per process is 64.\*[Gt]
The
.Xr getrlimit 2
call with the
.Ar RLIMIT_NOFILE
resource will obtain the current limit.
.It Er 25 ENOTTY Em "Inappropriate ioctl for device" .
A control function (see
.Xr ioctl 2 )
was attempted for a file or
special device for which the operation was inappropriate.
.en 26 ETXTBSY "Text file busy
Attempt to execute a program that is open for writing.  Obsolete under MINIX 3.
.It Er 27 EFBIG Em "File too large" .
The size of a file exceeded the maximum.
(The system-wide maximum file size is
2147483648 (2GB) bytes.
Each file system may impose a lower limit for files contained within it).
.It Er 28 ENOSPC Em "Device out of space" .
A
.Xr write 2
to an ordinary file, the creation of a
directory or symbolic link, or the creation of a directory
entry failed because no more disk blocks were available
on the file system, or the allocation of an inode for a newly
created file failed because no more inodes were available
on the file system.
.It Er 29 ESPIPE Em "Illegal seek" .
An
.Xr lseek 2
function was issued on a socket, pipe or
.Tn FIFO .
.It Er 30 EROFS Em "Read-only file system" .
An attempt was made to modify a file or directory
was made
on a file system that was read-only at the time.
.It Er 31 EMLINK Em "Too many links" .
The number of hard links to a single file has exceeded the maximum.
(The system-wide maximum number of hard links is 32767.
Each file system may impose a lower limit for files contained within it).
.It Er 32 EPIPE Em "Broken pipe" .
A write on a pipe, socket or
.Tn FIFO
for which there is no process
to read the data.
.It Er 33 EDOM Em "Numerical argument out of domain" .
A numerical input argument was outside the defined domain of the mathematical
function.
.It Er 34 ERANGE Em "Result too large or too small" .
The result of the function is too large or too small to be represented
in the available space.
.It Er 35 EDEADLK Em "Resource deadlock avoided" .
An attempt was made to lock a system resource that
would have resulted in a deadlock situation.
.It Er 36 ENAMETOOLONG Em "File name too long" .
A component of a path name exceeded 
.Pq Dv NAME_MAX
characters, or an entire
path name exceeded 255
.Pq Dv PATH_MAX 
characters.
.It Er 37 ENOLCK Em "No locks available" .
A system-imposed limit on the number of simultaneous file
locks was reached.
.It Er 38 ENOSYS Em "Function not implemented" .
Attempted a system call that is not available on this
system.
.It Er 39 ENOTEMPTY Em "Directory not empty" .
A directory with entries other than
.Ql \&.
and
.Ql \&..
was supplied to a remove directory or rename call.
.It Er 40 ELOOP Em "Too many levels of symbolic links" .
A path name lookup involved more than 16
.Pq Dv SYMLOOP_MAX
symbolic links.
.It Er 41 ERESTART Em "Service restarted" .
.It Er 43 ERESTART Em "Identifier removed" .
An IPC identifier was removed while the current process was waiting on it.
.It Er 44 EILSEQ Em "Illegal byte sequence" .
A wide character/multibyte character encoding error occurred.
.It Er 45 EFTYPE Em "Inappropriate file type or format" .
Attempted a file operation on a file of a type for which it was invalid.
.It Er 46 EOVERFLOW Em "Value too large to be stored in data type" .
A numerical result of the function was too large to be stored in the
caller-provided space.
.It Er 50 EPACKSIZE Em "Invalid packet size" .
.It Er 51 ENOBUFS Em "\&No buffer space available" .
An operation on a socket or pipe was not performed because
the system lacked sufficient buffer space or because a queue was full.
.It Er 52 EBADIOCTL Em "Illegal ioctl for device" .
.It Er 53 EBADMODE Em "Bad mode in ioctl" .
.It Er 54 EWOULDBLOCK Em "Would block" .
.It Er 55 ENETUNREACH Em "Network is unreachable" .
A socket operation was attempted to an unreachable network.
.It Er 56 EHOSTUNREACH Em "No route to host" .
A socket operation was attempted to an unreachable host.
.It Er 57 EISCONN Em "Socket is already connected" .
A
.Xr connect 2
request was made on an already connected socket; or,
a
.Xr sendto 2
or
.Xr sendmsg 2
request on a connected socket specified a destination
when already connected.
.It Er 58 EADDRINUSE Em "Address already in use" .
Only one usage of each address is normally permitted.
.It Er 59 ECONNREFUSED Em "Connection refused" .
No connection could be made because the target machine actively
refused it.
This usually results from trying to connect
to a service that is inactive on the foreign host.
.It Er 60 ECONNRESET Em "Connection reset by peer" .
A connection was forcibly closed by a peer.
This normally results from a loss of the connection on the remote
socket due to a timeout or a reboot.
.It Er 61 ETIMEDOUT Em "Operation timed out" .
A
.Xr connect 2
or
.Xr send 2
request failed because the connected party did not
properly respond after a period of time.
(The timeout period is dependent on the communication protocol).
.It Er 62 EURG Em "Urgent data present" .
.It Er 63 ENOURG Em "No urgent data present" .
.It Er 64 ENOTCONN Em "Socket is not connected" .
An request to send or receive data was disallowed because
the socket was not connected and (when sending on a datagram socket)
no address was supplied.
.It Er 65 ESHUTDOWN Em "Cannot send after socket shutdown" .
A request to send data was disallowed because the socket
had already been shut down with a previous
.Xr shutdown 2
call.
.It Er 66 ENOCONN Em "No such connection" .
.It Er 67 EAFNOSUPPORT Em "Address family not supported by protocol family" .
An address incompatible with the requested protocol was used.
For example, you shouldn't necessarily expect to be able to use
.Tn NS
addresses with
.Tn ARPA
Internet protocols.
.It Er 68 EPROTONOSUPPORT Em "Protocol not supported" .
The protocol has not been configured into the
system or no implementation for it exists.
.It Er 69 EPROTOTYPE Em "Protocol wrong type for socket" .
A protocol was specified that does not support the semantics of the
socket type requested.
For example, you cannot use the
.Tn ARPA
Internet
.Tn UDP
protocol with type
.Dv SOCK_STREAM .
.It Er 70 EINPROGRESS Em "Operation now in progress" .
An operation that takes a long time to complete (such as
a
.Xr connect 2 )
was attempted on a non-blocking object (see
.Xr fcntl 2 ) .
.It Er 71 EADDRNOTAVAIL Em "Cannot assign requested address" .
Normally results from an attempt to create a socket with an
address not on this machine.
.It Er 72 EALREADY Em "Operation already in progress" .
An operation was attempted on a non-blocking object that already
had an operation in progress.
.It Er 73 EMSGSIZE Em "Message too long" .
A message sent on a socket was larger than the internal message buffer
or some other network limit.
.It Er 74 ENOTSOCK Em "Socket operation on non-socket" .
Self-explanatory.
.It Er 75 ENOPROTOOPT Em "Protocol option not available" .
A bad option or level was specified in a
.Xr getsockopt 2
or
.Xr setsockopt 2
call.
.It Er 76 EOPNOTSUPP Em "Operation not supported" (has alias ENOTSUP) .
The attempted operation is not supported for the type of object referenced.
Usually this occurs when a file descriptor refers to a file or socket
that cannot support this operation,
for example, trying to
.Em accept
a connection on a datagram socket.
.It Er 77 ENETDOWN Em "Network is down" .
A socket operation encountered a dead network.
.It Er 78 EPFNOSUPPORT Em "Protocol family not supported" .
A socket operation specified an unsupported protocol family.
.It Er 79 EDESTADDRREQ Em "Destination address required" .
A required address was omitted from an operation on a socket.
.It Er 80 EHOSTDOWN Em "Host is down" .
The destination host has been determined to be down or disconnected.
.El
.Sh DEFINITIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Process ID
Each active process in the system is uniquely identified by a positive
integer called a process ID.  The range of this ID is from 1 to 29999.
.It Parent process ID
A new process is created by a currently active process; (see
.Xr fork 2 ) .
The parent process ID of a process is initially the process ID of its creator.
If the creating process exits,
the parent process ID of each child is set to the ID of 
.Em init ,
.Xr init 8 .
.It Process Group
Each active process is a member of a process group that is identified by
a positive integer called the process group ID.
This is the process ID of the group leader.
This grouping permits the signaling of related processes (see
.Xr termios 4 ).
.It Session
A session is a set of one or more process groups.
A session is created by a successful call to
.Xr setsid 2 ,
which causes the caller to become the only member of the only process
group in the new session.
.It Session leader
A process that has created a new session by a successful call to
.Xr setsid 2 ,
is known as a session leader.
Only a session leader may acquire a terminal as its controlling terminal (see
.Xr termios 4 ) .
.It Controlling process
A session leader with a controlling terminal is a controlling process.
.It Controlling terminal
A terminal that is associated with a session is known as the controlling
terminal for that session and its members.
.It "Real User ID and Real Group ID"
Each user on the system is identified by a positive integer
termed the real user ID.
.Pp
Each user is also a member of one or more groups.
One of these groups is distinguished from others and
used in implementing accounting facilities.
The positive integer corresponding to this distinguished group is
termed the real group ID.
.Pp
All processes have a real user ID and real group ID.
These are initialized from the equivalent attributes
of the process that created it.
.It "Effective User Id, Effective Group Id, and Group Access List"
Access to system resources is governed by two values:
the effective user ID and the group access list.
(In POSIX.1, the group access list is known as the set of supplementary
group IDs, and it is unspecified whether the effective group ID is
a member of the list.)
.Pp
The effective user ID and effective group ID are initially the
process's real user ID and real group ID respectively.  Either
may be modified through execution of a set-user-ID or set-group-ID
file (possibly by one its ancestors) (see
.BR execve (2)).
.Pp
The group access list is an additional set of group ID's
used only in determining resource accessibility.
Access checks are performed as described below in
.Qq File Access Permissions .
It Super-user
A process is recognized as a
.Em super-user
process and is granted special privileges if its effective user ID is 0.
.It Descriptor
An integer assigned by the system when a file is referenced
by
.Xr open 2
or
.Xr dup 2 ,
or when a socket is created by
.Xr pipe 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
or
.Xr socketpair 2 ,
which uniquely identifies an access path to that file or socket from
a given process or any of its children.
.It File Name
Names consisting of up to 60
.Pq Dv NAME_MAX
characters may be used to name
an ordinary file, special file, or directory.
.Pp
These characters may be selected from the set of all
.Tn ASCII
character
excluding 0 (NUL) and the
.Tn ASCII
code for
.Ql \&/
(slash).
(The parity bit, bit 7, must be 0).
.Pp
Note that it is generally unwise to use
.Ql \&* ,
.Ql \&? ,
.Ql \&[
or
.Ql \&]
as part of
file names because of the special meaning attached to these characters
by the shell.
.It Pathname
A path name is a
.Tn NUL Ns -terminated
character string starting with an
optional slash
.Ql \&/ ,
followed by zero or more directory names separated
by slashes, optionally followed by a file name.
The total length of a path name must be less than 255
.Pq Dv PATH_MAX
characters.
.Pp
If a path name begins with a slash, the path search begins at the
.Em root
directory.
Otherwise, the search begins from the current working directory.
A slash by itself names the root directory.
An empty string is not a valid pathname.
.It Directory
A directory is a special type of file that contains entries
that are references to other files.
Directory entries are called links.
By convention, a directory contains at least two links,
.Ql \&.
and
.Ql \&.. ,
referred to as
.Em dot
and
.Em dot-dot
respectively.
Dot refers to the directory itself and dot-dot refers to its parent directory.
.It "Root Directory and Current Working Directory"
Each process has associated with it a concept of a root directory
and a current working directory for the purpose of resolving path
name searches.
A process's root directory need not be the root
directory of the root file system.
.It File Access Permissions
Every file in the file system has a set of access permissions.
These permissions are used in determining whether a process
may perform a requested operation on the file (such as opening
a file for writing).
Access permissions are established at the time a file is created.
They may be changed at some later time through the
.Xr chmod 2
call.
.Pp
File access is broken down according to whether a file may be: read,
written, or executed.
Directory files use the execute permission to control if the
directory may be searched.
.Pp
File access permissions are interpreted by the system as
they apply to three different classes of users: the owner
of the file, those users in the file's group, anyone else.
Every file has an independent set of access permissions for
each of these classes.
When an access check is made, the system decides if permission should be
granted by checking the access information applicable to the caller.
.Pp
Read, write, and execute/search permissions on
a file are granted to a process if:
.Pp
The process's effective user ID is that of the super-user.
(Note: even the super-user cannot execute a non-executable file).
.Pp
The process's effective user ID matches the user ID of the owner
of the file and the owner permissions allow the access.
.Pp
The process's effective user ID does not match the user ID of the
owner of the file, and either the process's effective
group ID matches the group ID
of the file, or the group ID of the file is in
the process's group access list,
and the group permissions allow the access.
.Pp
Neither the effective user ID nor effective group ID
and group access list of the process
match the corresponding user ID and group ID of the file,
but the permissions for ``other users'' allow access.
.Pp
Otherwise, permission is denied.
.It Sockets and Address Families
A socket is an endpoint for communication between processes.
Each socket has queues for sending and receiving data.
.Pp
Sockets are typed according to their communications properties.
These properties include whether messages sent and received
at a socket require the name of the partner, whether communication
is reliable, the format used in naming message recipients, etc.
.Pp
Each instance of the system supports some
collection of socket types; consult
.Xr socket 2
for more information about the types available and
their properties.
.Pp
Each instance of the system supports some number of sets of
communications protocols.
Each protocol set supports addresses of a certain format.
An Address Family is the set of addresses for a specific group of protocols.
Each socket has an address
chosen from the address family in which the socket was created.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 3 ,
.Xr perror 3


