.\"	$NetBSD: man.conf.5,v 1.26 2015/04/07 10:17:21 plunky Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)man.conf.5	8.5 (Berkeley) 1/2/94
.\"
.Dd March 3, 2015
.Dt MAN.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm man.conf
.Nd configuration file for manual pages
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains the default configuration used by
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr catman 8 ,
and
.Xr makemandb 8
to find manual pages and information about manual pages (e.g. the
whatis database).
.Pp
Manual pages are located by searching an ordered set of directories
called the
.Dq man path
for a file that matches the name of the requested page.
Each directory in the search path usually has a set of subdirectories
in it (though this is not required).
When subdirectories are used, there are normally two subdirectories
for each section of the manual.
One subdirectory contains formatted copies of that section's manual
pages that can be directly displayed to a terminal, while the other
section subdirectory contains unformatted copies of the pages (see
.Xr nroff 1
and
.Xr mdoc 7 ) .
Formatted manual pages are normally named with a trailing
.Dq \.0
suffix.
.Pp
The
.Nm
file contains comment and configuration lines.
Comment lines start with the
.Dq #
character.
Blank lines are also treated as comment lines.
Configuration lines consist of a configuration keyword followed by a
configuration string.
There are two types of configuration keywords: control keywords and
section keywords.
Control keywords must start with the
.Dq _
character.
The following control keywords are currently defined:
.Bl -tag -width XXmachineX
.It _build
Identifies the set of suffixes used for manual pages that must be
formatted for display and the command that should be used to format
them.
Manual file names, regardless of their format, are expected to end in a
.Dq \.*
pattern, i.e. a
.Dq \&\.
followed by some suffix.
The first field of a _build line contains a man page suffix specification.
The suffix specification may contain the normal shell globbing characters
(NOT including curly braces
.Pq Dq {} ) .
The rest of the _build line is a shell command line whose standard
output is a formatted manual page that can be directly displayed to
the user.
There should be exactly one occurrence of the string
.Dq %s
in the shell command line, and it will
be replaced by the name of the file which is being formatted.
.It _crunch
Used by
.Xr catman 8
to determine how to crunch formatted pages
which originally were compressed man pages: The first field lists a suffix
which indicates what kind of compression were used to compress the man page.
The rest of the line must be a shell command line, used to compress the
formatted pages.
There should be exactly one occurrence of the string
.Dq %s
in the shell command line, and it will
be replaced by the name of the output file.
.It _default
Contains the system-wide default man path used to search for man pages.
.It _mandb
Defines the full pathname (not just a directory path) for a database to
be used
by the
.Xr apropos 1
and
.Xr whatis 1
commands.
The pathname may contain the normal shell globbing characters,
including curly braces
.Pq Dq {} ;
to escape a shell globbing character,
precede it with a backslash
.Pq Dq \e .
.It _subdir
Contains the list (in search order) of section subdirectories which will
be searched in any man path directory named with a trailing slash
.Pq Dq /
character.
This list is also used, even if there is no trailing slash character,
when a path is specified to the
.Xr man 1
utility by the user, by the
.Ev MANPATH
environment variable, or by the
.Fl M
and
.Fl m
options.
.It _suffix
identifies the set of suffixes used for formatted man pages
(the
.Dq \.0
suffix is normally used here).
Formatted man pages can be directly displayed to the user.
Each suffix may contain the normal shell globbing characters (NOT
including curly braces
.Pq Dq {} ) .
.It _version
Contains the version of the configuration file.
.It _ Ns Aq machine
Defines additional paths to be searched for the particular
.Dv machine
whose literal value is taken from
.Xr uname 1
.Fl m .
For example on an
.Dv amd64 ,
.Dv _amd64
is used.
.El
.Pp
Section configuration lines in
.Nm
consist of a section keyword naming the section and a configuration
string that defines the directory or subdirectory path that the section's
manual pages are located in.
The path may contain the normal shell globbing characters,
including curly braces
.Pq Dq {} ;
to escape a shell globbing character,
precede it with a backslash
.Pq Dq \e .
Section keywords must not start with the
.Dq _
character.
.Pp
A section path may contain either a list of absolute directories or
a list of or relative directories (but not both).
Relative directory paths are treated as a list of subdirectories that
are appended to the current man path directory being searched.
Section configuration lines with absolute directory paths (starting with
.Dq / )
completely replace the current man search path directory with their
content.
.Pp
Section configuration lines with absolute directory paths ending
with a trailing slash character are expected to contain subdirectories
of manual pages, (see the keyword
.Dq _subdir
above).
The
.Dq _subdir
subdirectory list is not applied to absolute section directories
if there is no trailing slash.
.Pp
In addition to the above rules, the
.Xr man 1
command also always checks in each directory that it searches for
a subdirectory with the same name as the current machine type.
If the machine-specific directory is found, it is also searched.
This allows the manual to contain machine-specific man pages.
Note that the machine subdirectory does not need to be specified
in the
.Nm
file.
.Pp
Multiple specifications for all types of
.Nm
configuration lines are
cumulative and the entries are used in the order listed in the file;
multiple entries may be listed per line, as well.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/man.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/man.conf
Standard manual configuration file.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Given the following
.Nm
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
_version	BSD.2
_subdir		cat[123]
_suffix		.0
_build		.[1-9]	nroff -man %s
_build		.tbl	tbl %s | nroff -man
_i386		x86
_default	/usr/share/man/
sect3		/usr/share/man/{old/,}cat3
.Ed
.Pp
By default, the command
.Dq Li man mktemp
will search for
.Dq mktemp. Ns Aq any_digit
and
.Dq mktemp.tbl
in the directories
.Dq Pa /usr/share/man/cat1 ,
.Dq Pa /usr/share/man/cat2 ,
and
.Dq Pa /usr/share/man/cat3 .
If on a machine of type
.Dq vax ,
the subdirectory
.Dq vax
in each
directory would be searched as well, before the directory was
searched.
.Pp
If
.Dq mktemp.tbl
was found first, the command
.Dq Li tbl Ao manual page Ac | nroff -man
would be run to build a man page for display to the user.
.Pp
The command
.Dq Li man sect3 mktemp
would search the directories
.Dq Pa /usr/share/man/old/cat3
and
.Dq Pa /usr/share/man/cat3 ,
in that order, for
the mktemp manual page.
If a subdirectory with the same name as the current machine type
existed in any of them, it would be searched as well, before each
of them were searched.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr machine 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr whereis 1 ,
.Xr fnmatch 3 ,
.Xr glob 3 ,
.Xr catman 8 ,
.Xr makewhatis 8
