base-adosfs-root base-sys-root
base-amd-bin base-sys-usr
base-amd-examples base-sys-share
base-amd-shlib base-sys-usr
base-audio-bin base-sys-usr
base-bind-bin base-sys-usr
base-bind-root base-sys-root
base-bootserver-bin base-sys-usr
base-c-bin base-sys-usr
base-c-usr base-sys-usr
base-calendar-bin base-sys-usr
base-calendar-share base-sys-share
base-cron-bin base-sys-usr
base-cron-root base-sys-root
base-crypto-bin base-sys-usr
base-crypto-examples base-sys-share
base-crypto-root base-sys-root
base-crypto-shlib base-sys-usr
base-cxx-usr base-c-usr
base-debug-bin base-sys-usr
base-dhclient-root base-sys-root
base-dhcpd-bin base-sys-share
base-dhcpd-bin base-sys-usr
base-dhcpd-examples base-sys-share
base-efs-root base-sys-root
base-ext2fs-root base-sys-root
base-filecorefs-root base-sys-root
base-fstab-examples base-sys-share
base-games-root base-sys-root
base-games-share base-sys-share
base-games-usr base-sys-usr
base-gnats-bin base-sys-usr
base-gnats-share base-sys-share
base-groff-font base-sys-share
base-groff-share base-termcap-share
base-hesiod-bin base-sys-usr
base-htmldoc-share base-sys-share
base-i18n-root base-sys-usr
base-i18n-shlib base-i18n-root
base-isdn-bin base-sys-usr
base-isdn-examples base-sys-share
base-krb5-bin base-sys-usr
base-krb5-examples base-sys-share
base-krb5-root base-sys-root
base-krb5-shlib base-sys-usr
base-libsaslc-examples base-sys-share
base-locale-Pig base-locale-share
base-locale-bg base-locale-share
base-locale-bin base-sys-usr
base-locale-ca base-locale-share
base-locale-cs base-locale-share
base-locale-da base-locale-share
base-locale-de base-locale-share
base-locale-el base-locale-share
base-locale-en base-locale-share
base-locale-eo base-locale-share
base-locale-es base-locale-share
base-locale-et base-locale-share
base-locale-fi base-locale-share
base-locale-fr base-locale-share
base-locale-gl base-locale-share
base-locale-he base-locale-share
base-locale-hr base-locale-share
base-locale-hu base-locale-share
base-locale-hy base-locale-share
base-locale-id base-locale-share
base-locale-is base-locale-share
base-locale-it base-locale-share
base-locale-ja base-locale-share
base-locale-ko base-locale-share
base-locale-lt base-locale-share
base-locale-nb base-locale-share
base-locale-nl base-locale-share
base-locale-no base-locale-share
base-locale-pl base-locale-share
base-locale-pt base-locale-share
base-locale-ro base-locale-share
base-locale-ru base-locale-share
base-locale-share base-sys-share
base-locale-sk base-locale-share
base-locale-sl base-locale-share
base-locale-sv base-locale-share
base-locale-tr base-locale-share
base-locale-uk base-locale-share
base-locale-zh base-locale-share
base-lpr-bin base-lpr-usr
base-lpr-root base-sys-root
base-lpr-usr base-sys-usr
base-magic-share base-termcap-share
base-mail-bin base-sys-usr
base-mail-root base-sys-root
base-mailwrapper-bin base-sys-usr
base-man-bin base-sys-usr
base-man-share base-sys-share
base-miscfs-examples base-sys-share
base-miscfs-root base-sys-root
base-net-shlib base-sys-usr
base-netutil-bin base-sys-usr
base-netutil-examples base-sys-share
base-netutil-root base-sys-usr
base-nfsclient-bin base-sys-usr
base-nfsclient-root base-sys-root
base-nfsserver-bin base-sys-usr
base-nis-bin base-sys-usr
base-nis-root base-sys-root
base-ntfs-root base-sys-root
base-ntp-bin base-sys-usr
base-ntp-root base-sys-root
base-objc-usr base-c-usr
base-pkgutil-bin base-sys-usr
base-postfix-bin base-postfix-usr
base-postfix-examples base-sys-share
base-postfix-root base-sys-root
base-postfix-usr base-sys-usr
base-ppp-bin base-sys-usr
base-psd-share base-sys-share
base-rcs-bin base-sys-usr
base-reference-share base-termcap-share
base-rescue-root base-sys-root
base-router-bin base-sys-usr
base-router-examples base-sys-share
base-router-root base-sys-root
base-rpcbind-bin base-sys-usr
base-rpcserver-bin base-sys-usr
base-rpcutil-bin base-sys-usr
base-secsh-bin base-sys-usr
base-secsh-shlib base-sys-usr
base-sendmail-bin base-sys-usr
base-sendmail-root base-sys-root
base-sendmail-share base-sys-share
base-sendmail-usr base-c-usr
base-slip-bin base-sys-usr
base-slip-root base-sys-root
base-smbfs-root base-sys-root
base-smm-share base-sys-share
base-sup-bin base-sys-usr
base-sup-examples base-sys-share
base-sys-examples base-sys-share
base-sys-share base-sys-root
base-sys-shlib base-sys-usr
base-sys-usr base-sys-root
base-sysutil-bin base-sys-usr
base-sysutil-examples base-sys-share
base-sysutil-root base-sys-usr
base-sysutil-share base-sys-share
base-termcap-share base-sys-share
base-texinfo-bin base-sys-usr
base-texinfo-share base-sys-share
base-texinfo_locale-cs base-locale-cs
base-texinfo_locale-da base-locale-da
base-texinfo_locale-de base-locale-de
base-texinfo_locale-eo base-locale-eo
base-texinfo_locale-fr base-locale-fr
base-texinfo_locale-he base-locale-he
base-texinfo_locale-hr base-locale-hr
base-texinfo_locale-ja base-locale-ja
base-texinfo_locale-nb base-locale-nb
base-texinfo_locale-nl base-locale-nl
base-texinfo_locale-no base-locale-no
base-texinfo_locale-pl base-locale-pl
base-texinfo_locale-ro base-locale-ro
base-texinfo_locale-ru base-locale-ru
base-texinfo_locale-sv base-locale-sv
base-texinfo_locale-tr base-locale-tr
base-texinfo_locale-zh base-locale-zh
base-timed-bin base-sys-usr
base-tn3270-bin base-sys-usr
base-usd-share base-sys-share
base-util-bin base-sys-usr
base-util-root base-sys-root
base-util-share base-sys-share
base-util_locale-cs base-locale-cs
base-util_locale-de base-locale-de
base-util_locale-el base-locale-el
base-util_locale-eo base-locale-eo
base-util_locale-es base-locale-es
base-util_locale-et base-locale-et
base-util_locale-fr base-locale-fr
base-util_locale-gl base-locale-gl
base-util_locale-hr base-locale-hr
base-util_locale-id base-locale-id
base-util_locale-it base-locale-it
base-util_locale-ja base-locale-ja
base-util_locale-sv base-locale-sv
base-x11-root base-sys-root
comp-c-bin base-sys-usr
comp-c-catman base-man-share
comp-c-include base-objc-usr
comp-c-lib base-sys-usr
comp-c-lintlib base-c-usr
comp-c-man base-man-share
comp-c-piclib base-sys-usr
comp-c-proflib base-sys-usr
comp-c-root base-sys-root
comp-c-share base-termcap-share
comp-c-shlib base-sys-usr
comp-c_locale-be base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-ca base-locale-ca
comp-c_locale-cs base-locale-cs
comp-c_locale-da base-locale-da
comp-c_locale-de base-locale-de
comp-c_locale-el base-locale-el
comp-c_locale-en@boldquot base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-en@quot base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-es base-locale-es
comp-c_locale-et base-locale-et
comp-c_locale-fi base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-fr base-locale-fr
comp-c_locale-gl base-locale-gl
comp-c_locale-id base-locale-id
comp-c_locale-it base-locale-it
comp-c_locale-ja base-locale-ja
comp-c_locale-ko base-locale-ko
comp-c_locale-nl base-locale-nl
comp-c_locale-nn base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-no base-locale-no
comp-c_locale-pl base-locale-pl
comp-c_locale-pr base-locale-pt
comp-c_locale-pt_BR base-locale-pt
comp-c_locale-ro base-locale-ro
comp-c_locale-ru base-locale-ru
comp-c_locale-sk base-locale-sk
comp-c_locale-sl base-locale-sl
comp-c_locale-sr base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-sv base-locale-sv
comp-c_locale-tr base-locale-tr
comp-c_locale-uk base-locale-share
comp-c_locale-zh_CN base-locale-zh
comp-c_locale-zh_TW base-locale-zh
comp-cvs-bin base-sys-usr
comp-cvs-catman base-man-share
comp-cvs-man base-man-share
comp-cxx-bin base-sys-usr
comp-cxx-catman base-man-share
comp-cxx-include base-cxx-usr
comp-cxx-lib base-sys-usr
comp-cxx-man base-man-share
comp-cxx-piclib base-sys-usr
comp-cxx-proflib base-sys-usr
comp-debug-bin base-sys-usr
comp-debug-catman base-man-share
comp-debug-man base-man-share
comp-debug-sbin base-sys-usr
comp-fortran-bin base-sys-usr
comp-fortran-catman base-man-share
comp-fortran-lib base-sys-usr
comp-fortran-man base-man-share
comp-fortran-proflib base-sys-usr
comp-i18n-lib base-i18n-root
comp-krb5-catman base-man-share
comp-krb5-include base-c-usr
comp-krb5-lib base-sys-usr
comp-krb5-man base-man-share
comp-krb5-proflib base-sys-usr
comp-krb5c-catman base-man-share
comp-objc-bin base-sys-usr
comp-objc-lib base-sys-usr
comp-objc-piclib base-sys-usr
comp-objc-proflib base-sys-usr
comp-sendmail-include base-sendmail-usr
comp-sendmail-lib base-sys-usr
comp-sendmail-lintlib base-c-usr
comp-sys-catman base-man-share
comp-sys-man base-man-share
comp-sys-root base-sys-root
comp-sysutil-catman base-man-share
comp-sysutil-man base-man-share
comp-util-bin base-sys-usr
comp-util-catman base-man-share
comp-util-man base-man-share
comp-util-sbin base-sys-usr
comp-util-share base-termcap-share
comp-util-share base-util-share
etc-amd-rc base-sys-root
etc-audio-rc base-sys-root
etc-bind-etc base-bind-root
etc-bind-rc base-sys-root
etc-bootserver-etc base-sys-root
etc-bootserver-rc base-sys-root
etc-cron-log base-sys-root
etc-cron-rc base-sys-root
etc-cron-root base-cron-root
etc-dhclient-rc base-sys-root
etc-dhcpd-rc base-sys-root
etc-games-etc base-sys-root
etc-games-scores base-games-root
etc-ipf-rc base-sys-root
etc-isdn-rc base-sys-root
etc-krb5-rc base-sys-root
etc-libsaslc-etc base-sys-root
etc-libsaslc-postfix base-sys-root
etc-lpr-etc base-sys-root
etc-lpr-log base-sys-root
etc-lpr-rc base-sys-root
etc-mail-etc base-sys-root
etc-mailwrapper-etc base-sys-root
etc-man-etc base-sys-root
etc-net-etc base-sys-root
etc-net-rc base-sys-root
etc-netutil-etc base-sys-root
etc-netutil-log base-sys-root
etc-nfsserver-rc base-sys-root
etc-nis-rc base-sys-root
etc-nis-root base-nis-root
etc-ntp-etc base-sys-root
etc-ntp-rc base-sys-root
etc-postfix-etc base-postfix-bin
etc-postfix-rc base-sys-root
etc-ppp-rc base-sys-root
etc-root-root base-sys-root
etc-router-etc base-sys-root
etc-router-rc base-sys-root
etc-rpcbind-rc base-sys-root
etc-secsh-etc base-sys-root
etc-secsh-rc base-sys-root
etc-sendmail-etc base-sendmail-root
etc-sendmail-log base-sys-root
etc-sendmail-rc base-sys-root
etc-sys-defaults base-sys-root
etc-sys-etc base-sys-root
etc-sys-log base-sys-root
etc-sys-rc base-sys-root
etc-sys-root base-sys-root
etc-sysutil-etc base-sysutil-bin
etc-sysutil-log base-util-root
etc-sysutil-rc base-sys-root
etc-timed-rc base-sys-root
etc-util-etc base-sys-root
etc-x11-rc base-sys-root
games-games-bin base-games-usr
games-games-catman base-man-share
games-games-man base-man-share
games-games-root base-games-root
games-games-share base-games-share
games-sys-root base-sys-root
games-usd-doc base-usd-share
games-utils-bin base-games-usr
games-utils-catman base-man-share
games-utils-man base-man-share
games-utils-share base-games-share
man-adosfs-catman base-man-share
man-adosfs-man base-man-share
man-amd-catman base-man-share
man-amd-info base-texinfo-share
man-amd-man base-man-share
man-audio-catman base-man-share
man-audio-man base-man-share
man-bind-catman base-man-share
man-bind-man base-man-share
man-bootserver-catman base-man-share
man-bootserver-man base-man-share
man-c-catman base-man-share
man-c-info base-texinfo-share
man-c-man base-man-share
man-computil-info base-texinfo-share
man-cron-catman base-man-share
man-cron-man base-man-share
man-crypto-catman base-man-share
man-crypto-man base-man-share
man-cvs-info base-texinfo-share
man-debug-catman base-man-share
man-debug-info base-texinfo-share
man-debug-man base-man-share
man-dhclient-catman base-man-share
man-dhclient-man base-man-share
man-dhcpd-catman base-man-share
man-dhcpd-man base-man-share
man-efs-catman base-man-share
man-efs-man base-man-share
man-ext2fs-catman base-man-share
man-ext2fs-man base-man-share
man-filecorefs-catman base-man-share
man-filecorefs-man base-man-share
man-fortran-info base-texinfo-share
man-gnats-catman base-man-share
man-gnats-info base-texinfo-share
man-gnats-man base-man-share
man-groff-catman base-man-share
man-groff-info base-texinfo-share
man-groff-man base-man-share
man-hesiod-catman base-man-share
man-hesiod-man base-man-share
man-info-share base-texinfo-share
man-ipf-catman base-man-share
man-ipf-man base-man-share
man-isdn-catman base-man-share
man-isdn-man base-man-share
man-krb5-catman base-man-share
man-krb5-info base-texinfo-share
man-krb5-man base-man-share
man-locale-catman base-man-share
man-locale-man base-man-share
man-lpr-catman base-man-share
man-lpr-man base-man-share
man-mail-catman base-man-share
man-mail-man base-man-share
man-mailwrapper-catman base-man-share
man-mailwrapper-man base-man-share
man-man-catman base-man-share
man-man-man base-man-share
man-miscfs-catman base-man-share
man-miscfs-man base-man-share
man-net-catman base-man-share
man-net-man base-man-share
man-netutil-catman base-man-share
man-netutil-man base-man-share
man-nfsclient-catman base-man-share
man-nfsclient-man base-man-share
man-nfsserver-catman base-man-share
man-nfsserver-man base-man-share
man-nis-catman base-man-share
man-nis-man base-man-share
man-ntfs-catman base-man-share
man-ntfs-man base-man-share
man-ntp-catman base-man-share
man-ntp-man base-man-share
man-pkgutil-catman base-man-share
man-pkgutil-man base-man-share
man-postfix-catman base-man-share
man-postfix-man base-man-share
man-ppp-catman base-man-share
man-ppp-man base-man-share
man-rc-catman base-man-share
man-rc-man base-man-share
man-rcs-catman base-man-share
man-rcs-man base-man-share
man-reference-catman base-man-share
man-reference-man base-man-share
man-router-catman base-man-share
man-router-man base-man-share
man-rpcserver-catman base-man-share
man-rpcserver-man base-man-share
man-rpcutil-catman base-man-share
man-rpcutil-man base-man-share
man-secsh-catman base-man-share
man-secsh-man base-man-share
man-sendmail-catman base-man-share
man-sendmail-man base-man-share
man-shlib-catman base-man-share
man-shlib-man base-man-share
man-slip-catman base-man-share
man-slip-man base-man-share
man-smbfs-catman base-man-share
man-smbfs-man base-man-share
man-sup-catman base-man-share
man-sup-man base-man-share
man-sys-cat base-man-share
man-sys-catman base-man-share
man-sys-info base-texinfo-share
man-sys-man base-man-share
man-sys-root base-sys-root
man-sysutil-catman base-man-share
man-sysutil-man base-man-share
man-texinfo-catman base-man-share
man-texinfo-info base-texinfo-share
man-texinfo-man base-man-share
man-timed-catman base-man-share
man-timed-man base-man-share
man-tn3270-catman base-man-share
man-tn3270-man base-man-share
man-util-catman base-man-share
man-util-info base-texinfo-share
man-util-man base-man-share
misc-amd-examples base-amd-examples
misc-amd-examples base-sys-examples
misc-bind-htmldoc base-htmldoc-share
misc-crypto-examples base-crypto-examples
misc-dhcpd-examples base-dhcpd-examples
misc-fstab-examples base-fstab-examples
misc-isdn-examples base-isdn-examples
misc-krb5-examples base-krb5-examples
misc-libsaslc-examples base-libsaslc-examples
misc-netutil-examples base-netutil-examples
misc-ntp-htmldoc base-man-share
misc-postfix-examples base-postfix-examples
misc-postfix-htmldoc base-htmldoc-share
misc-psd-doc base-psd-share
misc-reference-share base-reference-share
misc-router-examples base-router-examples
misc-sendmail-share base-sendmail-share
misc-smm-doc base-smm-share
misc-sup-examples base-sup-examples
misc-sys-examples base-miscfs-examples
misc-sys-examples base-sys-examples
misc-sys-root base-sys-root
misc-sysutil-examples base-sysutil-examples
misc-usd-doc base-usd-share
misc-util-htmldoc base-htmldoc-share
text-groff-bin base-sys-usr
text-groff-catman base-man-share
text-groff-font base-groff-font
text-groff-man base-man-share
text-groff-share base-groff-share
text-sys-root base-sys-root
text-texinfo-bin base-sys-usr
text-texinfo-share base-termcap-share
