.TH MOUNT 2
.SH NAME
mount, umount \- mount or umount a file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft B
.nf
#include <sys/mount.h>

int minix_mount(char *\fIspecial\fP, char *\fIname\fP, int \fImountflags\fP, int \fIsrvflags\fP, char *\fItype\fP, char *\fIargs\fP)
int minix_umount(char *\fIname\fP, int \fIsrvflags)
.fi
.ft P
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Mount()
tells the system that the file system
.I special
is to be mounted on the file
.IR name ,
effectively overlaying
.I name
with the file tree on
.IR special .
.I Name
may of any type, except that if the root of
.I special
is a directory, then
.I name
must also be a directory.
.I Special
must be a block special file, or a NULL pointer.
If a NULL pointer is passed, the file system is
mounted without a block device.
.I Mountflags
may be a bitwise combination of the following flags:
.TP 2
.B MNT_RDONLY
Mount file system read-only, rather than read-write.
.PP
.I Srvflags
may be a bitwise combination of the following flags:
.TP 2
.B MS_REUSE
Reuse the file system server image if possible.
.TP
.B MS_EXISTING
Do not start the file system server, but use existing one. The label of 
the running file server is specified in 
.I Type.
.PP
.I Type
is the type of the file system (e.g. "mfs"), used to pick a file system server.
If this parameter is NULL, the default type is used.
.I Args
is a string with arguments passed to the file system server.
Their interpretation is up to the server.
This parameter may be NULL as well.
.PP
.B Umount()
removes the connection between a device and a mount point,
.I name
may refer to either of them.  If more than one device is mounted on the
same mount point then unmounting at the mount point removes the last mounted
device, unmounting a device removes precisely that device.  The unmount will
only succeed if none of the files on the device are in use.
.I Srvflags
may be a bitwise combination of the following flags:
.TP 2
.B MS_EXISTING
Umount the file system but do not terminate the the file system server.
.PP
.TO
These calls may only be executed by the super-user.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mount (1),
.BR umount (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
