.TH SYMLINK 2 "March 17, 2006"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
symlink \- make a symbolic link to a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
#include <unistd.h>

int symlink(const char *\fIname1\fP, const char *\fIname2\fP)
.fi
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
A symbolic link
.I name2
is created.
The link has the name
.IR name1 .
.SH "RETURN VALUE
Upon successful completion, a value of 0 is returned.  Otherwise,
a value of \-1 is returned and
.B errno
is set to indicate the error.
.SH "ERRORS
.B Symlink
will fail and no link will be created if one or more of the following
are true:
.TP 15
[ENOTDIR]
A component of either path prefix is not a directory.
.TP 15
[ENAMETOOLONG]
A path name exceeds PATH_MAX characters.
.TP 15
[ENOENT]
A component of either path prefix does not exist.
.TP 15
[EACCES]
A component of either path prefix denies search permission.
.TP 15
[EACCES]
The requested link requires writing in a directory with a mode
that denies write permission.
.TP 15
[ELOOP]
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating one of the pathnames.
.TP 15
[EEXIST]
The link named by \fIname2\fP exists.
.TP 15
[ENOSPC]
The directory in which the entry for the new link is being placed
cannot be extended because there is no space left on the file
system containing the directory.
.ig
.TP 15
[EDQUOT]
The directory in which the entry for the new link
is being placed cannot be extended because the
user's quota of disk blocks on the file system
containing the directory has been exhausted.
..
.TP 15
[EIO]
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to 
the file system to make the directory entry.
.TP 15
[EROFS]
The requested link requires writing in a directory on a read-only file
system.
.TP 15
[EFAULT]
One of the pathnames specified
is outside the process's allocated address space.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR link (2),
.BR unlink (2).
