.\"" Modified Thu Jun 23 19:05:15 2011 by Vivek Prakash <vivekprakash@acm.org>
.TH HIER 7  2011-06-23 "MINIX 3" "MINIX 3 Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
hier \- Description of the file system hierarchy
.SH DESCRIPTION
A tour through the MINIX 3 directory hierarchy.
.TP
.I /
This is where the whole tree starts, and is called root.
.TP
.I /bin/
Contains the utility programs; see also \fB/sbin/\fP, \fB/usr/bin/\fP, \fB/usr/sbin\fP.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBcat\fP    show files, \fBcat\fP(1)	
	  \fBcp\fP     copy files and directories, \fBcp\fP(1)
	  \fBmount\fP  mount file systems, \fBmount\fP(1) 
	  \fBsh\fP     shell
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /dev/
Contains device, block, or other special files. See
.BR mknod(2).	
.PP
.nf
	  \fBconsole\fP computer's console device, \fBtty\fP(4)
	  \fBfd*\fP     floppy disk, \fBfd\fP(4)
	  \fBc?d*\fP    hard disk, \fBhd\fP(4)
	  \fBnull\fP    accetps and discards all input; produces no output
	  \fBtty*\fP    terminal device, \fBtty\fP(4)
	  \fBzero\fP    the zero device; produces null bytes
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /etc/
System configuration and data files; see also \fB/usr/etc/\fP.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBethers\fP  ethernet addresses database, \fBethers\fP(5)
	  \fBfstab\fP   filesystem table, \fBfstab\fP(5)
	  \fBgroup\fP   group permissions file
	  \fBhostname.file\fP	
			name of the local system, \fBusage\fP(5)
	  \fBhosts\fP   TCP/IP hosts database, \fBhosts\fP(5)
	  \fBkeymap\fP  keymap for custom keyboard, \fBloadkeys\fP(1)
	  \fBman.conf\fP
			configuration file for man(1), \fBman.conf\fP(5)
	  \fBmotd\fP    system message of the day, \fBlogin\fP(1)
	  \fBmtab\fP    mounted file system table, \fBfstab\fP(5)
	  \fBpasswd\fP  user database, \fBpasswd\fP(1) 
	  \fBprofile\fP system wide shell profile
	  \fBrc\fP      system startup script, \fBboot\fP(8)
	  \fBservices\fP
			TCP/IP names to services
	  \fBshadow\fP  shadow password database, \fBpasswd\fP(5)
	  \fBtermcap\fP terminal type descriptions, \fBtermcap\fP(1)
	  \fBttytab\fP  terminals device table, \fBttytab\fP(5)
	  \fButmp\fP    user login database, \fButmp\fP(5)
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /home/
Contains home directories for users.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBbin\fP     home directory for user bin
	  \fBast\fP     Honorary home directory of Andrew S. Tanenbaum
.fi
.TP
.I /mnt/
Mount point for temporarily mounted file system.
.TP
.I /proc/
Mount point for the process file system, which provides information about running processes and the kernel. 
.TP
.I /root/
This directory is the home directory for the root user.
.PP
.nf
	  \fB.ashrc\fP  ash (shell) startup configuration, \fBash\fP(1)
	  \fB.exrc\fP   ex/vi (editor) startup configuration, \fBvim\fP(1)
	  \fB.profile\fP
			login shell profile configuration
	  \fB.ssh/\fP   contains user private keys, known_hosts and 
			authorized_keys, \fBssh\fP(1)  	
.fi
.TP
.I /sbin/
Contains system programs and administrative utilites.
.TP
.I /tmp/	
Contains small, short-lived temporary files; see also \fB/usr/tmp/\fP. 
.TP
.I /usr/	
Contains source and majority of system utilities and files
.PP
.nf
	  \fIadm/\fP	Contains System administration files. 
	  
		  	\fBlastlog\fP	last logins, \fBlogin\fP(1)
		  	\fBlog\fP  	default log file
		  	\fBold\fP  	last weeks log files
		  	\fBwtmp\fP  	user logins and logouts, \fBlogin\fP(1)
		  	\fB*.cache\fP	cached data of some programs
		  	...
	  
	  \fIast/\fP	Contains user skeleton files. 

	  \fIbin/\fP	Common user programs and utilities.

		  	\fBman\fP  	show manual pages, \fBman\fP(1)
		  	...

	  \fIetc/\fP	More system data files; see also \fB/etc\fP. 

		  	\fBdaily\fP	daily system cleanup
	  		\fBrc\fP     	continued system initialization, \fBboot\fP(8)

	  \fIinclude/\fP	
		   Standard C include files.			

		   \fBarpa\fP		include files for Internet service protocols	
		   \fBmachine\fP	machine specific include files 
		   \fBminix\fP 	MINIX 3 kernel include files
		   \fBnetinet\fP	include files for Internet standard protocols
		   \fBsys\fP		system C include files.
		   ...

	  \fIlib/\fP	Compiler libraries and other support files. 
   
   		 \fBcawf/\fP	text formatter support files, \fBcawf\fP(1)
   		 \fBcrontab\fP	cron jobs, \fBcron\fP(8)
   		 \fBdict/\fP	word lists
   		 \fBlibc.a\fP	C library
   		 ...

  	 \fIman/\fP	Contains manual pages in subdirectories according to 
		  	the man page sections. See \fBman\fP(1).

	    	\fBcat*/\fP	preformatted manual pages
	    	\fBman0/\fP	section 0, Book style user commands
	    	\fBman1/\fP	user commands
	    	\fBman2/\fP	system calls
	    	\fBman3/\fP	library routines
	    	\fBman4/\fP	device files
	    	\fBman5/\fP	file formats
	    	\fBman6/\fP	games
	    	\fBman7/\fP	miscellaneous
	    	\fBman8/\fP	system utilities
	    	\fBwhatis\fP	table of manual pages, \fBwhatis\fP(5)
	    	...

  	 \fImdec/\fP	
   	 	Contains binaries associated with various boot programs. 

	    	\fBboot\fP  	bootstrap code, \fBinstallboot\fP(8)
	    	...

  	\fIpkg/\fP
   		 Contains programs which are related to local softwares.
    
  		 \fBbin/\fP  	utilities for locally installed programs
   		 \fBetc/\fP  	local configuration and data files
   		 \fBman/\fP  	manual pages associated with local programs
   		 ...

     	 \fIpreserve/\fP
	   	Contains saved elvis editor buffers. 
	    	See \fBelvprsv\fP(8), \fBelvrec\fP(1).

     	 \fIspool/\fP
	    	Contains spooled files for various commands and 
	    	mail programs.

	    	\fBat/\fP  	spooled jobs for \fBat\fP(1)
	    	\fBat/past/\fP  completed \fBat\fP(1) jobs
	    	\fBcrontabs/\fP spooled jobs for \fBcron\fP(8)	
	    	\fBlpd/\fP  	spooled files for printing
	    	\fBmail/\fP  	mail drops, \fBmail\fP(1)
	    	\fBuser\fP  	mailbox of user
	    	...

   	\fIsrc/\fP	 Contains system and command source files. 

	    	\fBLICENSE\fP	MINIX 3 license to use
	    	\fBMakefile\fP	targets for building and installing libraries, 
			    	utilities and boot files
	    	\fBcommands/\fP	source file for command utilities
	    	\fBcommon/\fP	
			\fBinclude/\fP	includes common to NetBSD and Minix
			\fBlib/\fP	lib files common to NetBSD kernel and libc
	    	\fBdocs/\fP	documents related to recent source changes
	    	\fBdrivers/\fP	source files for various device drivers
	    	\fBetc/\fP  	source for files in /etc/	
	    	\fBinclude/\fP	standard C include source files
	    	\fBkernel/\fP	kernel source files
	    	\fBlib/\fP  	source for libraries in /usr/lib/
	    	\fBman/\fP  	manual pages	
	    	\fBservers/\fP	source files for system servers
	        \fBshare/\fP	source for files in /usr/share/
	    	\fBtest/\fP	source files for system test programs	
	    	\fBtools/\fP	kernel image making tools
	    	...

  	 \fItmp/\fP	Contains large, short lived temporary files.
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ls (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR find (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR mount (1).
.SH NOTES
Not all of the directories and files shown are present.  They must be
created as needed.
.SH BUGS
Many of the listed manual references do not yet exist.
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
