.TH TTYTAB
.SH NAME
ttytab \- table of login terminals
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /etc/ttytab
.SH DESCRIPTION
.de SP
.if t .sp 0.4
.if n .sp
..
The
.B ttytab
file lists all the terminal devices that one can login on.  It is a simple
text file that contains lines of the form:
.PP
.RS
.ft I
.ta +\w'namennn'u +\w'typennn'u +\w'"getty"nnn'u
name	type	"getty"	"init"
.DT
.ft R
.RE
.PP
The
.I name
and
.I type
fields are simple words,
.I name
is the name of the terminal device with
.B /dev
stripped off, and
.I type
tells the type of terminal to initialize the
.B TERM
environment variable.
.PP
The
.I getty
and
.I init
fields may name commands that are run to allow one to login on the line, or
to initialize the line.  Both these fields may be more than one word if
the whole field is enclosed in double quotes.
.I Getty
is usually simply the word
.BR getty ,
the command that prints a system identification banner and allows on to type
a name to log in.
.I Init
is usually an
.B stty
command to set the baud rate and parity of a serial line.
.PP
The
.I init
field may be omitted to indicate that no initialization is necessary, and the
.I getty
field may be left out to not start a login process.  Terminals should not be
left out, because their place in the
.B ttytab
file determines their slot number as returned by
.BR ttyslot (3).
.PP
Comments (introduced by #) and empty lines are ignored.
.SH EXAMPLE
A
.B ttytab
for the console, two serial lines, and a pseudo tty entry:
.PP
.RS
.nf
.ta +\w'consolennn'u +\w'networknnn'u +\w'gettynnnn'u
console	minix	getty
tty00	vt100	getty	"stty 9600"
tty01	dialup	getty	"stty 38400"
ttyp0	network
.DT
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP 15n
.B TERM
Terminal type
.SH NOTES
It is customary to set the type to
.B dialup
for a dialin line.  One can check for that name in one's
.BR .profile .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR getttyent (3),
.BR ttyslot (3),
.BR init (8).
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
