.TH CLEANTMP 8
.SH NAME
cleantmp \- clean out a tmp dir
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cleantmp
.RB [ \-d "[\fIlevel\fR]]"
.RB [ \-i
.IR file "] ..."
.BR \-\fIdays\fB | \-f
.RI [ directory " ...]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Cleantmp
removes all files in each of the given directories and their subdirectories
that have not been accessed for at least
.I 'days'
days.  Empty subdirectories are removed if their modified times are more
than
.I 'days'
days old.
.B Cleantmp
looks at days as humans do, i.e. they last from midnight to midnight.
Meaning that
.B cleantmp -1 /tmp
removes all files that were not touched after midnight last night. This may
be very helpful, because in many cases that big file that clogs up
.B /tmp
was created yesterday, but less than 24 hours ago.
.PP
The 'days' flag may be replaced by
.B \-f
causing
.B cleantmp
to remove all files in the directory no matter what age.  Specifying zero
days doesn't work, because it is assumed to be a mistake.
.PP
.B Cleantmp
knows that files and directories that have a name starting with a '.' are
special and will not delete them or files within them if they are not at
least 14 days old.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.BR \-d "[\fIlevel\fR]]"
Set the debug level to
.I level
(by default 1).  Normally only errors are reported.  Debug level 1 lists the
actions taken on standard error, level 2 also prints the file times used,
and level 3 makes
.B cleantmp
playact, i.e. nothing is really removed.
.TP
.BI \-i " file "
One or more
.B \-i
options name files to be ignored.  Files are not removed if they are in the
list of ignored files by either a directory entry match, or a full pathname
match.  This option is useful to keep things like named pipes that some
longlived programs foolishly put in temporary directories.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR find (1).
.SH BUGS
Don't use '\fBcleantmp -1\fP' shortly after midnight.
.PP
It would be nice if one could delete files that are, say, 2 hours old.
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
