.TH INTR 8
.SH NAME
intr \- run a command with interrupts enabled
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B intr
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR seconds ]
.I command
.RI [arg "...]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Intr
executes a command with keyboard interrupts enabled, and standard input,
output and error redirected to the terminal or the console.  It may also
be used for the opposite: to detach a process from the terminal.
.PP
There are three situations where intr may be used:  From a process that has
no controlling tty, like the shell running
.B /etc/rc
at boot time, from a script that runs in the background, or by the System
Administrator to restart a daemon.
.PP
In the first case
.B intr
will use
.B /dev/console
as a controlling tty and as standard input, output and error.  In the
second case
.B intr
will use
.B /dev/tty
to connect the command to the controlling tty.  In the third case the
process will be removed from the process group, and will have I/O redirected
to
.B /dev/null
as input, and
.B /dev/log
for output.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
Daemonize a process instead of bringing it to the foreground.  Don't forget
to use '&' to make the shell not wait for the process, because you won't be
able to kill it with the interrupt key.
.TP
.BI \-t " seconds"
Schedule an alarm to kill the process in the given number of seconds.
Use it for a process that may wait indefinitely for a service that may
not be available.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B /dev/console
Main computer console.
.TP
.B /dev/log
Message logging device.
.TP
.B /dev/tty
Name for the controlling tty.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR boot (8),
.BR tty (4),
.BR setsid (2),
.BR alarm (2).
.SH BUGS
Maybe
.B intr \-d
should fork to daemonize a process, but the author likes it if the process
stays in the jobs list of his shell.
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
