.TH PWDAUTH
.SH NAME
pwdauth \- password authentication program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /usr/lib/pwdauth
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pwdauth
is a program that is used by the
.BR crypt (3)
function to do the hard work.  It is a setuid root utility so that it is
able to read the shadow password file.
.PP
.B Pwdauth
expects on standard input two null terminated strings, the
password typed by the user, and the salt.  That is, the two arguments of
the
.B crypt
function.  The input read in a single read call must be 1024 characters or
less including the nulls.
.B Pwdauth
takes one of two actions depending on the salt.
.PP
If the salt has the form "\fB##\fIuser\fR" then the
.I user
is used to index the shadow password file to obtain the encrypted password.
The input password is encrypted with the one-way encryption function
contained within
.B pwdauth
and compared to the encrypted password from the shadow password file.  If
equal then
.B pwdauth
returns the string "\fB##\fIuser\fR" with exit code 0, otherwise exit
code 2 to signal failure.  The string "\fB##\fIuser\fR" is also returned
if both the shadow password and the input password are null strings to
allow a password-less login.
.PP
If the salt is not of the form "\fB##\fIuser\fR" then the password is
encrypted and the result of the encryption is returned.  If salt and
password are null strings then a null string is returned.
.PP
The return value is written to standard output as a null terminated string
of 1024 characters or less including the null.
.PP
The exit code is 1 on any error.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR crypt (3),
.BR passwd (5).
.SH NOTES
A password must be checked like in this example:
.PP
.RS
pw_ok = (strcmp(crypt(key, pw->pw_passwd), pw->pw_passwd) == 0);
.RE
.PP
The second argument of crypt must be the entire encrypted password and
not just the two character salt.
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot (kjb@cs.vu.nl)
