.de IT
.nr a +1 1
.ti -0.25i
.if \\na<10 \\0\\na.~\\fB\\$1\\fP
.if \\na>9 \\na.~\\fB\\$1\\fP
.PP
..
.de Cb
.sp 0.5v
\s-1\\f5\\c
..
.de Ce
\\fR\\s0\\c
.sp 0.5v
..
.tr ~ 
.TH LS 1
.SH NAME
setup \- install MINIX 3 on the hard disk
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsetup\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.in +0.25i
.PP
These steps correspond to the steps on the screen.

.IT "Select keyboard type"
When you are asked to select your national keyboard, do so. 
This and other steps have a default choice, in square brackets.
If you agree with it, just hit ENTER. In most steps, the default is generally
a good choice for beginners.
The us-swap keyboard interchanges the CAPS LOCK and CTRL keys, as is conventional
on UNIX systems.

.IT "Select your Ethernet chip"
You will now be asked which of the available Ethernet driver you want
installed (or none). Please choose one of the options.

.IT "Create a partition for MINIX 3"
You will first be asked if you are an expert in MINIX 3 disk partitioning.
If so, you will be placed in the \fIpart\fR program to give you full power to
edit the Master Boot Record (and enough rope to hang yourself).
If you are not an expert, press ENTER for the default action, which is an
automated step-by-step guide to creating a disk partition.

\fBSubstep 2.1: Select a disk to install MINIX 3\fR
.PP
An IDE controller may have up to four disks. The \fIsetup\fR script will now
look for each one. Just ignore an error messages.
When the drives are listed, select one. and confirm your choice.
If you have two hard disks and install MINIX 3 to the second one and have
trouble booting from it, please see \fIwww.minix3.org/doc/using2disks.html\fR
for the solution.

\fBSubstep 2.2: Select a disk region\fR
.PP
You must now choose a region to install MINIX 3 into. You have three choices:
.sp 0.5v
   (1) Select a free region
   (2) Select a partition to overwrite
   (3) Delete an existing partition to free up space and merge with adjacent free space
.sp 0.5v
For choices (1) and (2), type the region number. For (3) type
.Cb
   delete
.Ce
then give the region number when asked.

\fBSubstep 2.3: Confirm your choices\fR
.PP
You have now reached the point of no return. You will be asked if you want to
continue. \fBIf you do, the data in the selected region will be lost forever.\fR
If you are sure, type:
.Cb
   yes
.Ce
and then ENTER. To exit the setup script without changing the
partition table, hit CTRL-C.

.IT "Select a block size"
Disk block sizes of 1-KB, 2-KB, 4-KB, and 8-KB are supported, but
to use a size larger than 4-KB you have to change a constant and recompile
the system. If your memory is 16 MB or more, use the default (4 KB); with
smaller memories, use 1 KB.

.IT "Wait for bad block detection"
The setup script will now scan for bad disk blocks. This will take
several minutes, possibly 10 minutes or more on a large partition.
Please be patient.
If you are absolutely certain there are no bad blocks, you can kill the scan
by hitting CTRL-C.

.IT "Wait for files to be copied"
When the scan finishes, files will be automatically copied from the CD-ROM to
the hard disk. Every file will be announced as it is copied. 
When the copying is complete, MINIX 3 is installed.
Shut the system down by typing
.Cb
   shutdown
.Ce
Always stop MINIX 3 this way to avoid data loss as MINIX 3 keeps some files on
the RAM disk and only copies them back to the hard disk at shutdown time.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR boot(8),
.BR usage (8)

