.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)rsh.1c	6.1 (Berkeley) 4/29/85
.\"
.TH RSH 1 "April 29, 1985"
.UC 5
.SH NAME
rsh \- remote shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rsh
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR username ]
.I host
.RI [ command ]
.br
.I host
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-l
.IR username ]
.RI [ command ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Rsh
connects to the specified
.IR host ,
and executes the specified \fIcommand\fR.
.B Rsh
copies its standard input to the remote command, the standard
output of the remote command to its standard output, and the
standard error of the remote command to its standard error.
Interrupt, quit and terminate signals are propagated to the remote
command; \fBrsh\fP normally terminates when the remote command does.
.PP
The remote username used is the same as your local username,
unless you specify a different remote name with the
.B \-l
option.
This remote name must be equivalent (in the sense of
.BR rlogin (1))
to the originating account; no provision
is made for specifying a password with a command.
.PP
If you omit
.IR command ,
then instead of executing a single command, you will be logged in
on the remote host using
.BR rlogin (1).
.PP
Shell metacharacters which are not quoted are interpreted
on local machine, while quoted metacharacters are interpreted on
the remote machine.
Thus the command
.PP
.RS
rsh otherhost cat remotefile >> localfile
.RE
.PP
appends the remote file
.I remotefile
to the localfile
.IR localfile ,
while
.PP
.RS
rsh otherhost cat remotefile ">>" otherremotefile
.RE
.PP
appends
.I remotefile
to
.IR otherremotefile .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-l " username"
Specify the remote user name.
.TP
.B \-n
Connect standard input of the remote command to /dev/null.  Do this if
.B rsh
should not inadvertently read from standard input.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rcp (1),
.BR rlogin (1),
.BR rhosts (5).
.SH BUGS
You cannot run an interactive command
(like
.BR rogue (6)
or
.BR vi (1));
use
.BR rlogin (1).
