Copyright (C) 2004  Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
See COPYRIGHT in the source root or http://isc.org/copyright.html for terms.

The BIND v9 ARM master document is now kept in DocBook XML format.

Version: $Id: README-SGML,v 1.17 2004-03-05 05:04:43 marka Exp $

The entire ARM is in the single file:

    Bv9ARM-book.xml

All of the other documents - HTML, PDF, etc - are generated from this
master source.

This file attempts to describe what tools are necessary for the
maintenance of this document as well as the generation of the
alternate formats of this document.

This file will also spend a very little time describing the XML and
SGML headers so you can understand a bit what you may need to do to be
able to work with this document in any fashion other than simply
editing it. 

We will spend almost no time on the actual tags and how to write an
XML DocBook compliant document. If you are at all familiar with SGML
or HTML it will be very evident. You only need to know what the tags
are and how to use them. You can find a good resource either for this
either online or in printed form:

    DocBook: The Definitive Guide
    By Norman Walsh and Leonard Muellner
    ISBN: 156592-580-7
    1st Edition, October 1999
    Copyright (C) 1999 by O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.

The book is available online in HTML format:

    http://docbook.org/

and buried in:

    http://www.nwalsh.com/docbook/defguide/index.html

A lot of useful stuff is at NWalsh's site in general. You may also
want to look at:

    http://www.xml.com/

The BIND v9 ARM is based on the XML 4.0 DocBook DTD. Every XML and
SGML document begins with a prefix that tells where to find the file
that describes the meaning and structure of the tags used in the rest
of the document.

For our XML DocBook 4.0 based document this prefix looks like this:

    <!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.0//EN"
		   "/usr/local/share/xml/dtd/docbook/docbookx.dtd">

This "DOCTYPE" statement has three parts, of which we are only using
two:

o The highest level term that represents this document (in this case
  it is "book"

o The identifier that tells us which DTD to use. This identifier has
  two parts, the "Formal Public Identifier" (or FPI) and the system
  identifier. In SGML you can have either a FPI or a SYSTEM identifier
  but you have to have at least one of them. In XML you have to have a
  SYSTEM identifier.

FP & SYSTEM identifiers - These are names/lookups for the actual
DTD. The FPI is a globally unique name that should, on a properly
configured system, tell you exactly what DTD to use. The SYSTEM
identifier gives an absolute location for the DTD. In XML these are
supposed to be properly formatted URL's.

SGML has these things called "catalogs" that are files that map FPI's
in to actual files. A "catalog" can also be used to remap a SYSTEM
identifier so you can say something like: "http://www.oasis.org/foo"
is actually "/usr/local/share/xml/foo.dtd"

When you use various SGML/XML tools they need to be configured to look
at the same "catalog" files so that as you move from tool to tool they
all refer to the same DTD for the same document.

We will be spending most of our configuration time making sure our
tools use the same "catalog" files and that we have the same DTD's
installed on our machines. XML's requirement of the SYSTEM identifier
over the FPI will probably lead to more problems as it does not
guarantee that everyone is using the same DTD.

I did my initial work with the "sgmltools" the XML 4.0 DocBook DTD and
"jade" or "openjade."

You can get the 4.0 XML DocBook DTD from:

    http://www.docbook.org/xml/4.0/

(download the .zip file.) NOTE: We will eventually be changing the
SYSTEM identifier to the recommended value of:

    http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.0/docbookx.dtd

NOTE: Under FreeBSD this is the package: 

    /usr/ports/textproc/docbook-xml

NetBSD instructions are coming soon.

With packages listed below installed under FreeBSD the "catalog" file
that all the tools refer to at least one is in:

    /usr/local/share/sgml/catalog

In order for our SYSTEM identifier for the XML DocBook dtd to be found
I create a new catalog file at the top of the XML directory created on
FreeBSD:

   /usr/local/share/xml/catalog

This file has one line:

   SYSTEM "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.0/docbookx.dtd" "/usr/local/share/xml/dtd/docbook/docbookx.dtd"

Then in the main "catalog" I have it include this XML catalog:

   CATALOG "/usr/local/share/xml/catalog"


On your systems you need to replace "/usr/local/share" with your
prefix root (probably /usr/pkg under NetBSD.)

NOTE: The URL used above is supposed to the be the proper one for this
XML DocBook DTD... but there is nothing at that URL so you really do
need the "SYSTEM" identifier mapping in your catalog (or make the
SYSTEM identifier in your document refer to the real location of the
file on your local system.)

HOW TO VALIDATE A DOCUMENT:

I use the sgmltools "nsgmls" document validator. Since we are using
XML we need to use the XML declarations, which are installed as part
of the modular DSSL style sheets:

    nsgmls -sv /usr/local/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/dtds/decls/xml.dcl \
	   Bv9ARM-book.xml

A convenient shell script "validate.sh" is now generated by configure
to invoke the above command with the correct system-dependent paths.

The SGML tools can be found at:

    ftp://ftp.us.sgmltools.org/pub/SGMLtools/v2.0/source/ \
    ftp://ftp.nllgg.nl/pub/SGMLtools/v2.0/source/

FreeBSD package for these is: 

    /usr/ports/textproc/sgmltools

HOW TO RENDER A DOCUMENT AS HTML or TeX:

o Generate html doc with:

    openjade -v -d ./nominum-docbook-html.dsl \
	 -t sgml \
	 /usr/local/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/dtds/decls/xml.dcl \
	 Bv9ARM-book.xml

A convenient shell script "genhtml.sh" is now generated by configure to
invoke the above command with the correct system-dependent paths.

On NetBSD there is no port for "openjade" however "jade" does still
work. However you need to specify the "catalog" file to use for style
sheets on the command line AND you need to have a default "catalog"
mapping where to find various DTDs. It seems that "jade" installed out
of the box on NetBSD does not use a globally defined "catalog" file
for mapping PUBLIC identifiers in to SYSTEM identifiers.

So you need to have a "catalog" file in your current working directory
that has in it this: (these are probably more entries than you need!)

     CATALOG "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/iso8879/catalog"
     CATALOG "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/docbook/2.4.1/catalog"
     CATALOG "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/docbook/3.0/catalog"
     CATALOG "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/docbook/3.1/catalog"
     CATALOG "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/jade/catalog"
     CATALOG "/usr/local/share/xml/catalog"

(These would all be "/usr/local" on FreeBSD)

So the command for jade on NetBSD will look like this:

jade -v -c /usr/pkg/share/sgml/catalog -t sgml \
     -d ./nominum-docbook-html.dsl \
     /usr/pkg/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/dtds/decls/xml.dcl \
     ./Bv9ARM-book.xml

Furthermore, since the style sheet subset we define has in it a hard
coded path to the style sheet is based, it is actually generated by
configure from a .in file so that it will contain the correct
system-dependent path: where on FreeBSD the second line reads:

    <!ENTITY dbstyle SYSTEM "/usr/local/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/html/docbook.dsl" CDATA DSSSL>
  
On NetBSD it needs to read:

    <!ENTITY dbstyle SYSTEM "/usr/pkg/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/html/docbook.dsl" CDATA DSSSL>

NOTE: This is usually solved by having this style sheet modification
be installed in a system directory and have it reference the style
sheet it is based on via a relative path.

o Generate TeX documentation:

openjade -d ./nominum-docbook-print.dsl -t tex -v \
     /usr/local/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/dtds/decls/xml.dcl \
     Bv9ARM-book.xml

If you have "jade" installed instead of "openjade" then use that as
the command. There is little difference, openjade has some bug fixes
and is in more active development.

To convert the resulting TeX file in to a DVI file you need to do:

    tex "&jadetex" Bv9ARM-book.tex

You can also directly generate the pdf file via:

    pdftex "&pdfjadetex" Bv9ARM-book.tex

The scripts "genpdf.sh" and "gendvi." have been added to simply
generating the  PDF and DVI output. These substitute the correct paths
of NetBSD & FreeBSD. You still need to have TeX, jadeTeX, and pdfTeX
installed and configured properly for these to work.

You will need to up both the "pool_size" and "hash_extra" variables in
your texmf.cnf file and regenerate them. See below.

You can see that I am using a DSSSL style sheet for DocBook. Actually
two different ones - one for rendering html, and one for 'print'
media.

NOTE: For HTML we are using a Nominum DSSSL style instead of the
default one (all it does is change the chunking to the chapter level
and makes the files end with ".html" instead of ".htm" so far.) If you
want to use the plain jane DSSSL style sheet replace the:

    -d ./nominum-docbook-html.dsl

with

    -d /usr/local/share/sgml/docbook/dsssl/modular/html/docbook.dsl

This style sheet will attempt to reference the one above.

I am currently working on fixing these up so that it works the same on
our various systems. The main trick is knowing which DTD's and DSSSL
stylesheets you have installed, installing the right ones, and
configuring a CATALOG that refers to them in the same way. We will
probably end up putting our CATALOG's in the same place and then we
should be able to generate and validate our documents with a minimal
number of command line arguments.

When running these commands you will get a lot of messages about a
bunch of general entities not being defined and having no default
entity. You can ignore those for now.

Also with the style sheets we have and jade as it is you will get
messages about "xref to title" being unsupported. You can ignore these
for now as well.

=== Getting the various tools installed on FreeBSD
(NetBSD coming soon..)

o On freebsd you need to install the following packages:
  o print/teTeX
  o textproc/openjade
  o textproc/docbook
  o textproc/docbook-xml
  o textproc/dsssl-docbook-modular
  o textproc/dtd-catalogs

o on freebsd you need to make some entities visible to the docbook xml
  dtd by making a symlink (can probably be done with a catalog too)
  ln -s /usr/local/share/xml/entity /usr/local/share/xml/dtd/docbook/ent

o you may need to edit /usr/local/share/sgml/catalog and add the line:

  CATALOG "/usr/local/share/sgml/openjade/catalog"

o add "hugelatex," Enlarge pool sizes, install the jadetex TeX driver
  file.

  cd /usr/local/share/texmf/web2c/
  sudo cp texmf.cnf texmf.cnf.bak

  o edit the lines in texmf.cnf with these keys to these values:

                  main_memory = 1100000
                  hash_extra = 15000
                  pool_size = 500000
                  string_vacancies = 45000
                  max_strings = 55000
                  pool_free = 47500
                  nest_size = 500
                  param_size = 1500
                  save_size = 5000
                  stack_size = 1500

  sudo tex -ini -progname=hugelatex -fmt=hugelatex latex.ltx
  sudo texconfig init
  sudo texhash

  o For the jadetex macros you will need I recommend you get a more
    current version than what is packaged with openjade or jade.

    Checkout http://www.tug.org/applications/jadetex/
    
    Unzip the file you get from there (should be jadetex-2.20 or
    newer.) 

    In the directory you unzip: 

      sudo make install
      sudo texhash

    NOTE: In the most uptodate "ports" for FreeBSD, jadetext is 2.20+
    so on this platform you should be set as of 2001.01.08.
