.TH AR 1
.SH NAME
ar, aal \- archivers
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBar\fR [\fBdmpqrtx\fR][\fBabciluv\fR]\fR [\fIposname\fR] \fIarchive\fR [\fIfile \fR...]\fR
.br
\fBaal\fR [\fBdpqrtx\fR][\fBclv\fR]\fR \fIarchive\fR [\fIfile \fR...]\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "ar r libc.a sort.s" "Replace \fIsort\fR.s in \fIlibc.a\fR"
.EX "ar rb a.s libc.a b.s" "Insert \fIb.s\fR before \fIa.s\fR in \fIlibc.a\fR"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fIAr\fR allows groups of files to be put together into a single archive.
It is normally used for libraries of compiled procedures.  \fIAal\fR is like
\fIar\fP, but is to be used with the ACK compiler.  The following keys
are allowed:
.PP
.ta 0.25i 0.50i
.nf
	\fBd\fR:	Delete. \fIAr\fR will delete the named members.
	\fBm\fR:	Move named files. \fIAr\fR expects \fIa\fR, \fIb\fR, or \fIi\fR to be specified.
	\fBp\fR:	Print the named files (list them on \fIstdout\fR)
	\fBq\fR:	Quickly append to the end of the archive file.
	\fBr\fR:	Replace (append when not in archive).
	\fBt\fR:	Print the archive's table of contents.
	\fBx\fR:	Extract
.fi
.PP
\fBThe keys may optionally concatencated with one or more of the following\fR:
.nf
.PP
	\fBa\fR:	After \fIposname\fR
	\fBb\fR:	Before \fIposname\fR
	\fBc\fR:	Create  (suppresses creation message)
	\fBi\fR:	Before \fIposname\fR
	\fBl\fR:	Local temporary file for work instead of \fI/tmp/ar.$$$$$\fR
	\fBu\fR:	Replace only if dated later than member in archive
	\fBv\fR:	Verbose
.PP
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR anm (1),
.BR asize (1),
.BR nm (1),
.BR size (1).
