.TH CUT 1
.SH NAME
cut \- select out columns of a file
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcut [ \fB \-b \fR|\fB \-c\fR] \fIlist\fR [\fIfile...\fR]\fR
.br
\fBcut \-f \fIlist\fR [\fB\-d \fIdelim\fR] [\fB \-s\fR]\fR [\fIfile...\fR]" 
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.FL "\-b" "Cut specified bytes"
.FL "\-c" "Select out specific characters"
.FL "\-d" "Change the column delimiter to \fIdelim\fR"
.FL "\-f" "Select out specific fields that are separated by the delimiter character ( see \fIdelim\fR)"
.FL "\-i" "Runs of delimiters count as one"
.FL "\-s" "Suppres lines with no delimiter characters, when used with the \-f option. Lines with no delimiters are passwd through untouched"
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "cut \-f 2 file" "Extract field 2"
.EX "cut \-c 1\-2,5 file" "Extract character columns 1, 2, and 5"
.EX "cut \-c 1\-5,7\- file" "Extract all columns except 6"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fICut\fR extracts one or more fields or columns from a file and writes them on
standard output.
If the \fB\-f\fR flag is used, the fields are separated by a delimiter 
character, normally a tab, but can be changed using the \fB\-d\fR flag.
If the \fB\-c\fR flag is used, specific columns can be specified.
The list can be comma or BLANK separated. The \fB\-f\fR and
\fB\-c\fR flags  are mutually exclusive.
Note: The POSIX1003.2 standard requires the option \-b to cut out
specific bytes in a file. It is intended for systems with multi byte
characters (e.g. kanji), since MINIX uses only one byte characters,
this option is equivalent to \-c. For the same reason, the option
\-n has no effect and is not listed in this manual page.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sed (1),
.BR awk (9).
