.TH ED 1
.SH NAME
ed \- editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBed \fIfile\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.FL "\-" "Suppress line/byte count messages (for in scripts)"
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "ed prog.c" "Edit \fIprog.c\fR"
.EX "echo '1,$p' | ed - file" "Odd way to write 'cat file'"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fIEd\fR is functionally equivalent to the standard V7 editor, ed.  
It supports the following commands:
.PP
.nf
.ta 0.5i 0.95i	
	(.)	a: append
	(.,.)	c: change
	(.,.)	d: delete
		e: edit new file"
		f: print name of edited file"
	(1,$)	g: global command
	(.)	i: insert
	(.,.+1)	j: join lines together
	(.)	k: mark
	(.)	l: print with special characters in octal
	(.,.)	m: move
	(.,.)	p: print
		q: quit editor"
	(.)	r: read in new file
	(.,.)	s: substitute
	(1,$)	v: like g, except select lines that do not match
	(1,$)	w: write out edited file
.fi
Many of the commands can take one or two addresses, as indicated above.  The
defaults are shown in parentheses.  Thus \fIa\fR appends to the current 
line, and \fIg\fR works on the whole file as default.  
The dot refers to the current line.
Below is a sample editing session with comments given following the # symbol.
.PP
.nf
.ta 0.5i 2.5i
	ed prog.c	# Edit prog.c
	3,20p	# Print lines 3 through 20
	/whole/	# Find next occurence of \fIwhole\fR
	s/whole/while/	# Replace \fIwhole\fR by \fIwhile\fR
	g/Buf/s//BUF/g	# Replace \fIBuf\fR by \fIBUF\fR everywhere
	w	# Write the file back
	q	# Exit the editor
.fi
\fIEd\fR is provided for its sentimental value.
If you want a line-oriented editor, try \fIex\fR.
If you want a good editor, use \fIelle\fR, \fIelvis\fR, or \fImined\fR.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR elvis (1),
.BR elle (9),
.BR mined (9).
