.TH MDB 1
.SH NAME
mdb \- MINIX 3 debugger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mdb
.RB [ \-fc ]
.I file
.br
.B mdb 
.BR [-L|-l]log\-file
.I exec-file 
.RI [ core\-file ]
.RI [ @command\-file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.de SP
.if t .sp 0.4
.if n .sp
..
.B mdb
is the MINIX 3 debugger. 
.SH OPTIONS
Its command line options are:
.TP
.B \-f
Just examine the specified file.
.TP
.B \-c
Examine 'core' file. No exec-file will be supplied.
.TP
.B \-Llog\-file
Log to file only
.TP
.B \-llog\-file
Log to file.
.SP 
.IR exec\-file
Unless the -c option has been specified, the exec-file is required.
.SP
.IR core\-file
The core-file is optional.
.SP
If the core-file is supplied, 
.B mdb
assumes that the user wishes to examine the core file.
Otherwise 
.B mdb 
assumes that the user will run the exec-file and trace it.
.SP
.IR @command\-file
.B mdb 
executes command from command-file.
.SH OVERVIEW
.br
.B mdb 
commands are of the form: 
.I [ expression ]
.I command
.SP
.I expression
can be of the form:
.IP
.I address 
which defaults to text segment
.IP
address 
.I overriden
by 
.I T:
for Text segment
or 
.I D:
for Data segment
or
.I S:
for Stack segment
.IP
.I symbol
where 
.B mdb 
does a lookup for the symbol first as a 
.I text 
symbol and then as a 
.I data 
symbol.
.SP
.TP
.I command
.SP
The help command is ?. 
.SP
For detailed help on a command type: 
.I command ?.
.SP
A semi-colon can be used to separate commands on a line.
.SP
.SH MDB COMMANDS
.SP
! Shell escape
.SP
#  Set Variable or register
.SP 
Tt Current call / Backtrace all
.SP
/nsf Display for n size s with format f
.SP
Xx [n] Disasm / & display reg for n instructions
.SP
Rr a Run / with arguments a
.SP
Cc [n] Continue with current signal / no signal n times
.SP
Ii [n] Single step with / no signal for n instructions
.SP
Mm t n Trace until / Stop when modified t type for n instructions
.SP
k  Kill
.SP
Bb Display / Set Break-pt
.SP
Dd Delete all / one break-points
.SP
P Toggle Pagging
.SP
Ll name Log to file name / and to standard output
.SP
Vv Toggle debug flag / Version info
.SP
V Version info
.SP
e [t] List symbols for type t
.SP
y Print segment mappings
.SP
s [n] Dump stack for n words
.SP
z [a] Trace syscalls with address a
.SP
? Help - short help
.SP
@ file Execute commands from file
.SP
Qq Quit / and kill traced process
.SP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.SP
trace(2).
.SH DIAGNOSTICS

.SH NOTES

.SH BUGS

.SH AUTHOR
Philip Murton and others
