.TH MOUNT 1
.SH NAME
mount \- mount a file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmount [\fB\-r\fR] [\fB\-t \fItype\fR] [\fB\-o \fIoptions\fR] \fIspecial \fIfile\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-a
# All file systems in /etc/fstab except \/ are mounted. File systems marked 'noauto' are skipped
.TP 5
.B \-r
# File system is mounted read-only
.TP 5
.B \-t
# File system type
.TP 5
.B \-n
# Don't update mtab
.TP 5
.B \-o
# Options passed to FS server
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 20
.B mount /dev/fd1 /user
# Mount diskette 1 on \fI/user\fP
.TP 20
.B mount \-t procfs none /proc
# Mount proc file system on \fI/proc\fP
.TP 20
.B mount \-a
# Mount all file systems listed in /etc/fstab except \/.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The file system contained on the special file \fIspecial\fP is mounted on
\fIfile\fP. If the value of "\fBnone\fP" is given for \fIspecial\fP,
the file system is mounted without a block special device underneath it.
In the first example above, the root directory of the file system in drive 1
can be accessed as
.B /user
after the mount.
When the file system is no longer needed, it must be unmounted before being
removed from the drive.
.PP
The
.B \-t
parameter may be used to mount a file system of a type other than the default.
The
.B \-o
flag may be used to pass options to the file system server.
The interpretation of these options is up to the server.
.PP
If \fBmount\fP is invoked without any parameters, it will print the list of
currently mounted file systems according to
.BR mtab (5).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR df (1),
.BR mkfs (1),
.BR fsck (1),
.BR umount (1),
.BR mount (2),
.BR fstab (5).
