.TH STTY 1
.SH NAME
stty \- set terminal parameters
.SH SYNOPSIS
.de SP
.if t .sp 0.4
.if n .sp
..
.in +4n
.ti -4n
.B stty
.RB [ \-ag]
.SP
.ti -4n
.B stty
.I encoded-form
.SP
.ti -4n
.B stty
.I speed
.B ispeed
.I speed
.B ospeed
.I speed
.B "cs5 cs6 cs7 cs8"
.RB [ \- ] parenb
.RB [ \- ] parodd
.RB [ \- ] hupcl
.RB [ \- ] cstopb
.RB [ \- ] cread
.RB [ \- ] clocal
.RB [ \- ] ignbrk
.RB [ \- ] brkint
.RB [ \- ] ignpar
.RB [ \- ] parmrk
.RB [ \- ] inpck
.RB [ \- ] istrip
.RB [ \- ] inlcr
.RB [ \- ] igncr
.RB [ \- ] icrnl
.RB [ \- ] ixon
.RB [ \- ] ixoff
.RB [ \- ] ixany
.RB [ \- ] opost
.RB [ \- ] onlcr
.RB [ \- ] xtabs
.RB [ \- ] onoeot
.RB [ \- ] isig
.RB [ \- ] icanon
.RB [ \- ] iexten
.RB [ \- ] echo
.RB [ \- ] echoe
.RB [ \- ] echok
.RB [ \- ] echonl
.RB [ \- ] noflsh
.RB [ \- ] tostop
.RB [ \- ] lflusho
.BR eof =\fIc
.BR eol =\fIc
.BR erase =\fIc
.BR erase =\fIc
.BR intr =\fIc
.BR kill =\fIc
.BR quit =\fIc
.BR susp =\fIc
.BR start =\fIc
.BR stop =\fIc
.BR rprnt =\fIc
.BR lnext =\fIc
.BR flush =\fIc
.BR min =\fIn
.BR time =\fIn
.B rows
.I n
.B cols
.I n
.B xpixels
.I n
.B ypixels
.I n
.B cooked
.B raw
.RB [ \- ] evenp
.RB [ \- ] parity
.RB [ \- ] oddp
.RB [ \- ] nl
.B ek
.B sane
.in -4n
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Stty
shows or changes the parameters of the terminal connected to standard input.
.B Stty
takes a myriad of arguments most of which are mapped directly to
the flags and special characters described in
.BR tty (4),
so we won't describe them here.
.PP
.B Stty
has three forms of operation.  First, without any arguments
.B stty
shows all terminal attributes that are different from the default state.
Option
.B \-a
makes
.B stty
print all terminal attributes, and
.B \-g
lets
.B stty
print the attributes in a special encoded form, a simple row of colon separated
hexadecimal numbers.
.PP
In the second form of operation
.B stty
takes an encoded form as produced by the
.B \-g
option and sets the terminals attributes to its decoded value.
.PP
In the third form
.B stty
interprets a series of flags and parameters settings and modifies the
terminal attributes accordingly.  Flags can be given as
.B icanon
or
.B \-icanon
for instance, either setting or clearing the
.B ICANON
flag.
Special character values can by set like
.B "intr=^C"
for example, which sets the interrupt character to CTRL-C.  You can either
use a real CTRL-C, or the two characters `^' and `C'.  In any case
it is probably necessary to use quotes to guard it from the shell:
.BR "intr='^C'" .
.PP
A number alone is interpreted as a baud rate setting for both the input and
output rate.  The input or the output rate can be set separately with use
of the
.B ispeed
and
.B ospeed
prefixes to the number.  The character size can be set with
.BR cs5 ,
.BR cs6 ,
.BR cs7
or
.BR cs8 .
.PP
The
.B MIN
and
.B TIME
value, the number of rows and columns, and the xpixels and ypixels of the
window can also be set using one of the keywords
.BR min ,
.BR time ,
.BR rows ,
.BR cols ,
.BR xpixels
or
.BR ypixels ,
followed by a decimal number that is the value of the setting.
.PP
.B Stty
accepts several keywords that are not named by corresponding flags or
parameters in
.BR tty (4).
They set several attributes at once:
.TP
.B cooked
Same as
.BR "icrnl ixon opost onlcr isig icanon iexten echo" ,
setting all the attributes that are needed for line oriented mode.
.TP
.B raw
Same as
.BR "\-icrnl \-ixon \-opost \-onlcr \-isig \-icanon \-iexten \-echo" ,
setting all the attributes for a raw data channel.
.TP
.B evenp parity
These synonyms are equal to
.BR "cs7 parenb \-parodd" ,
setting the line to 7 bits even parity.
.TP
.B oddp
Same as
.BR "cs7 parenb parodd" ,
setting the line to 7 bits odd parity.
.TP
.B "\-parity \-evenp \-oddp"
All synonyms for
.BR "cs8 \-parenb" ,
setting the line to 8 bits, no parity.
.TP
.B nl
Same as
.BR icrnl ,
setting carriage return to line feed input translation.
.TP
.B \-nl
Same as
.BR "\-icrnl \-inlcr \-igncr" ,
disabling any carriage return or line feed handling.
.TP
.B ek
Set the
.B ERASE
and
.B KILL
special characters back to the default.
.TP
.B sane
Set all attributes to the default except things like the line speed and
parity, because their "sane" value is probably what it is right now.
The default values are compiled into
.B stty
from the <termios.h> include file.  Use
.B "stty sane; stty -a"
to know what they are.
.SH FILES
.TP 15n
.B /etc/ttytab
The
.B init
field of this file may contain an
.B stty
command to set the attributes to match an attached RS232 terminal or modem.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tty (4),
.BR ttytab (5).
.SH NOTES
The
.BR cooked ,
.BR raw ,
.BR rows ,
.BR cols ,
.BR xpixels
and
.BR ypixels
keywords are MINIX 3 additions beyond the keywords defined by POSIX.
.B Rows
and
.B cols
are common UNIX extensions, however.
There are more MINIX 3 specific flags that match the MINIX 3 specific attributes
described in
.BR tty (4).
.SH AUTHOR
Kees J. Bot <kjb@cs.vu.nl>
