.TH SVC 1
.SH NAME
svc, ci, co, svclog \- shell version control system
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBci\fR [\fB\-lu\fR]\fR \fIfile\fR
.br
\fBco\fR [\fB\-l\fR]\fR [\fB\-r \fIrev\fR] \fIfile\fR
.br
\fBsvclog \fIfile\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-l
# For \fIci\fR, checkin, checkout again, and lock file
.TP 5
.B \-l
# For \fIco\fR, checkout file and then lock the archive
.TP 5
.B \-u
# After checking in, do not delete the file
.TP 5
.B \-r
# Check out revision \fIrev\fR instead most recent revision
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 20
.B ci \-u file
# Check in \fIfile\fR
.TP 20
.B co \-l file
# Check out \fIfile\fR and lock archive
.TP 20
.B co \-r 2 file
# Check out version 2
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fISvc\fR is the Shell Version Control system, patterned on RCS.
It maintains a sequence of versions in archive files, so that new versions
can be checked in (added to the archive), and old versions can be checked
out (made available).
To create an archive for \fIfile\fR, check it in with the \fB\-u\fR flag.
This action will prompt for a log message and then create an archive called
\fIfile,S\fR in the current directory, or in the subdirectory \fISVC\fR if 
it exists.  
The file will not be deleted, but will be made unwritable.
.PP
To update the file, check it out with the \fB\-l\fR flag.
Then modify it, and check it back in, giving a new message when prompted.
After this process has been repeated many times, the archive will contain
the entire history.
Any version can be checked out using the \fB\-r\fR flag.
To get a printout of the history, use \fIsvclog\fR.
