.TH SZ 1
.SH NAME
sz \- send a file using the zmodem protocol
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsz\fR [\fB\-LNbdefnopqruvy+\fR]\fR [\fB\-ci \fIcommand\fR] [\fB\-Ll\fR n\fR] [\fB\-t \fItimeout\fR]\fR
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH OPTIONS
.FL "\-L" "Use \fIn\fR-byte packets"
.FL "\-N" "Overwrite if source is newer/longer"
.FL "\-b" "Binary file"
.FL "\-c" "Send command for execution"
.FL "\-d" "Convert dot to slash in names"
.FL "\-e" "Escape for all control characters"
.FL "\-f" "Send full path name"
.FL "\-i" "Send command and return immediately"
.FL "\-l" "Flow control every \fIn\fR packets"
.FL "\-n" "Overwrite destination if source is newer"
.FL "\-o" "Use old (16-bit) checksum"
.FL "\-p" "Protect file if it already exists"
.FL "\-q" "Quiet; opposite of verbose"
.FL "\-r" "Resume interrupt file transfer"
.FL "\-t" "Set \fItimeout\fR in tenths of a second"
.FL "\-u" "Unlink file after successful transmission"
.FL "\-v" "Verbose; opposite of quiet"
.FL "\-y" "Yes, clobber existing files"
.FL "\-+" "Append to an existing file"
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "sz file </dev/tty01 >/dev/tty01" "Send \fIfile\fR"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
XMODEM, YMODEM, and ZMODEM are a family of protocols that are widely used
is the \s-2MS-DOS\s0 world for transferring information reliably from one
computer to another.  In all of these protocols, a series of bytes are sent
from one computer to the other, and then an acknowledgement is sent back
to confirm correct reception.  Checksums are used to detect errors so that
transmission is reliable even in the face of noisy telephone lines.
\fISz\fR is a program that sends a file sent from another computer using the
zmodem protocol.
The file can be received using \fIrz\fR.
.PP
\fISz\fR uses the ZMODEM error correcting
protocol to send one or more files over a dial-in serial
port to a variety of programs running under
\s-1MINIX 3\s-1,
\s-2UNIX\s+2, 
\s-2MS-DOS\s0, \s-2CP/M\s0, \s-2VMS\s0, and other operating systems.
It is the successor to XMODEM and YMODEM.
.PP
ZMODEM greatly simplifies file transfers compared to XMODEM.
In addition to a friendly user interface, ZMODEM provides
Personal Computer and other users an efficient, accurate,
and robust file transfer method.
.PP
ZMODEM provides complete end-to-end data integrity between
application programs.  ZMODEM's 32 bit CRC catches errors
that sneak into even the most advanced networks.
.PP
Output from another program may be piped to \fIsz\fR for
transmission by denoting standard input with \-:
.PP
.B "	""ls \-l | sz \-"
.PP
The program output is transmitted with the filename \fIsPID.sz\fR
where PID is the process ID of the \fIsz\fR program.  If the
environment variable \fIONAME\fR is set, that is used instead.  In
this case, the command:
.PP
.B "	""ls \-l | ONAME=con sz \-ay \-"
.PP
will send a \&'file\&' to the PC-DOS console display.  
The \fB\-y\fR option instructs the receiver to open the file for writing
unconditionally.  
The \fB\-a\fR option causes the receiver to
convert 
\s-2UNIX\s+2
newlines to PC-DOS carriage returns and linefeeds.
On
\s-2UNIX\s+2
systems, additional information about the file is
transmitted.  If the receiving program uses this
information, the transmitted file length controls the exact
number of bytes written to the output dataset, and the
modify time and file mode are set accordingly.
.PP
If \fIsz\fR is invoked with $SHELL set and if that variable
contains the string \fIrsh\fR or \fIrksh\fR (restricted shell), \fIsz\fR
operates in restricted mode.  Restricted mode restricts
pathnames to the current directory and \fIPUBDIR\fR (usually
\fI/usr/spool/uucppublic\fR) and/or subdirectories thereof.
.PP
The options and flags available are:
.in +0.25i
.ti -0.25i
.B \-+
.br
Instruct the receiver to append transmitted data to an existing file.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-a
.br
Convert NL characters in the transmitted file to CR/LF.
This is done by the sender for XMODEM and YMODEM, by the receiver for ZMODEM.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-b
.br
Binary override: transfer file without any translation.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-c
.br
Send COMMAND (follows \fIc\fR) to the receiver for execution, return with
COMMAND's exit status.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-d
.br
Change all instances of \&'.\&' to \&'/\&' in the transmitted
pathname.  Thus, C.omenB0000 (which is unacceptable to
\s-2MS-DOS\s0 or CP/M) is transmitted as C/omenB0000.  If the
resultant filename has more than 8 characters in the
stem, a \&'.\&' is inserted to allow a total of eleven.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-e
.br
Escape all control characters; normally XON, XOFF, DLE,
CR-@-CR, and Ctrl-X are escaped.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-f
.br
Send Full pathname.  Normally directory prefixes are stripped from 
the transmitted filename.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-i
.br
Send COMMAND (follows \fIi\fR) to the receiver for execution, return
Immediately upon the receiving program's successful reception of the command.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-L
.br
Use ZMODEM sub-packets of length \fIn\fR (follows \fIL\fR).  
A larger \fIn\fR (32 <= \fIn\fR <= 1024) gives slightly higher throughput, a 
smaller one speeds error recovery.  The default is 128 below 300
baud, 256 above 300 baud, or 1024 above 2400 baud.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-l 
.br
Wait for the receiver to acknowledge correct data every
\fIn\fR (32 <= \fIn\fR <= 1024) characters.  
This may be used to avoid network overrun when XOFF flow control is lacking.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-n
.br
Send each file if destination file does not exist.  
Overwrite destination file if source file is newer than the destination file.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-N
.br
 Send each file if destination file does not exist.  Overwrite destination 
file if source file is newer or longer than the destination file.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-o
.br
Disable automatic selection of 32 bit CRC.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-p
.br
Protect existing destination files by skipping transfer if the destination 
file exists.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-q
.br
Quiet suppresses verbosity.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-r
.br
Resume interrupted file transfer.  If the source file is longer than the 
destination file, the transfer commences at the offset in the source file
that equals the length of the destination file.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-t
.br
Change timeout.
The timeout, in tenths of seconds, follows, the \fB\-t\fR flag.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-u
.br
Unlink the file after successful transmission.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-w
.br
Limit the transmit window size to \fIn\fR bytes (\fIn follows \fB(enw\fR).
.ti -0.25i
.B \-v
.br
Verbose causes a list of file names to be appended to \fI/tmp/szlog\fR.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-y
.br
Instruct a ZMODEM receiving program to overwrite any existing file with the 
same name.
.ti -0.25i
.B \-Y
.br
Instruct a ZMODEM receiving program to overwrite any existing file with the 
same name, and to skip any source files that do have a file with the same 
pathname on the destination system.
.in -0.25i
.SS "Examples"
.PP
Below are some examples of the use of \fIsz\fR.
.PP
.B "	""sz \-a \d\s+2*\s0\u.c"
.PP
This single command transfers all .c files in the current
directory with conversion (\fB\-a\fR) to end-of-line
conventions appropriate to the receiving environment.
.sp
.B "	""sz \-Yan \d\s+2*\s0\u.c \d\s+2*\s0\u.h"
.PP
.LP
Send only the \fI.c\fR and \fI.h\fR files that exist on both systems,
and are newer on the sending system than the corresponding
version on the receiving system, converting 
\s-1MINIX 3\s-1
to \s-2MS-DOS\s0 text format.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rz (1),
.BR term (1).
