.TH TERM 1
.SH NAME
term \- turn PC into a dumb terminal [IBM]
.SH SYNOPSIS
.in +.5i
.ti -.5i
\fBterm\fR [\fIbaudrate\fR]\fR [\fIparity\fR] [\fIbits_per_character\fR]
[\fB\-\fIdial_string\fR] [\fB\-c\fIkcmd\fR] [\fIdevice\fR]\fR
.in -.5i
.br
.de FL
.TP
\\fB\\$1\\fR
\\$2
..
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX "term 2400" "Talk to modem at 2400 baud"
.EX "term 1200 7 even" "1200 baud, 7 bits/char, even parity"
.EX "term 8 9600 /dev/tty01" "9600 baud, 8 bits/char, no parity, use tty01"
.EX "term -atdt12345 /dev/tty01" "Start with a command to dial out"
.EX "term -cH'echo Hello World!' ..." "Bind a shell command to the 'H' key"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fITerm\fR allows 
\s-1MINIX 3\s-1
to talk to a terminal or modem over RS232 
port 1.  The program first sets the baudrate, parity and character length, 
and then forks.
The parent sits in a loop copying from \fIstdin\fR (usually the console's
keyboard), to the terminal or modem (\fI/dev/tty00\fR).  
The child sits in a loop
copying from the terminal or modem (\fI/dev/tty00\fR) to standard output.  
Thus when
RS232 port 1 is connected to a modem, every keystroke typed on the keyboard
is sent to the modem, and every character arriving from the modem is displayed.
Standard input and output may be redirected, to provide a primitive file
transfer program, with no checking.  Any argument that starts with
.B \-at
is sent out to the modem, usually to dial out.  \fITerm\fP accepts
several commands that are formed by typing the escape character, CTRL-],
and a letter.  Type CTRL-]? to see a list of commands.  The subshell command
is very important, it allows you to type in a ZMODEM command to transfer
data.  Do not quit \fIterm\fR to do this, or your modem line will be reset!
\fITerm\fP keeps the modem line open on file descriptor 9 while running the
subshell, so you can type
.PP
.in +.5i
<&9 >&9
.in -.5i
.PP
at the end of your ZMODEM command to connect it to the modem.  With
.BI \-c kcmd
arguments you can bind shell commands to keys.  The character just after
.BR \-c
is the key to use, the rest of the characters form the command to bind to the
key.  This command also has the modem open on file descriptor 9.
.LP
Important note: to use \fIterm\fR, it is essential that 
\fI/etc/ttytab\fR is configured so
that there is no login session started on the modem line.
If there is, both the login session and
term will try to read from the modem, and nothing will work.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rz (1),
.BR sz (1).
