.TH URLGET 1
.SH NAME
urlget, ftpget, httpget \- retrieve a file from the internet to stdout
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B urlget 
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RI url
.P
.B ftpget 
.RI host 
.RI path 
.RI [user[pass]]
.P
.B httpget 
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RI host
.RI path
.SH DESCRIPTION
.de SP
.if t .sp 0.4
.if n .sp
..
.B Urlget 
gets a file specified by a URL and copies it to standard output.
.P
.B Ftpget
similarly gets a file from a conventional ftp server, a login name
and password can be specified.
.P
.B Httpget
is similar to 
.B urlget,
but the host and path are specified separately without a scheme, as with
ftpget. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
show the status line and MIME header from the server.
.P
.B \-d
discard the file body.
.P
.B \-p
use POST method, otherwise use GET.
.SH EXAMPLES
.de EX
.TP 20
\\fB\\$1\\fR
# \\$2
..
.TP 15n
.EX "urlget http://minix1.woodhull.com/pub/contrib/file.tar.Z > file.tar.Z" "Download file.tar.Z"
.EX "ftpget minix1.woodhull.com /pub/contrib/README.txt > README.txt" "Get a file from an anonymous ftp server"
.EX "httpget -dh minix1.woodhull.com/index.html" "Inspect the header of a web page"
.SH NOTES
These commands execute the same binary under different names. These commands
provide a lightweight non-interactive command-line method of downloading a 
file or inspecting the status of a web page. Data retrieved are written 
to standard output.
.SH AUTHOR
Michael Temari <Michael@TemWare.Com>
.P
Man page compiled by Al Woodhull <asw@woodhull.com>
.\" rev 2006-06-16
