.so mnx.mac
.TH ELLE 9
.CD "elle \(en ELLE Looks Like Emacs"
.SX "elle \fIfile\fR [\fIfile2\fR]"
.FL "\fR(none)"
.EY "elle file.c" "Start the editor"
.PP
\fIELLE\fR (ELLE Looks Like Emacs) is an Emacs clone for 
.MX .  
ELLE is not full Emacs but it has about 80 commands and is quite fast.
.SP 0.5
.SS "Key bindings"
.SP 0.5
.PP
\fIMined\fR only has a small number of commands.  All of them are either of
the form CTRL-x or are on the numeric keypad.  Emacs, in contrast, has so
many commands, that not only are all the CTRL-x commands used up, but so
are all the ESC x (escape followed by x; escape is not a shift character,
like CTRL).  Even this is not enough, so CTRL-X is used as a prefix for
additional commands.  Thus CTRL-X CTRL-L is a command, and so is CTRL-X K.
Note that what is conventionally written as CTRL-X K really means CTRL-X k.
In some contexts it is traditional to write CTRL-X as ^X.
Please note that they mean the same thing.
.PP
As a result, many Emacs commands need three or four key strokes to 
execute.  Some people think 3-4 key strokes is too many.
For this reason, Emacs and ELLE allow users to assign their own key bindings.
In ELLE this is done with \*(OQuser profiles.\*(CQ  A user profile is a file listing
which function is invoked by which key stroke.  The user profile is then
compiled by a program called ellec into binary form.  When ELLE starts up
it checks to see if a file .ellepro.b1 exists in $HOME.  If it does, this
file is read in and overrides the default bindings.  
.PP
A user profile that simulates the \fImined\fR commands fairly
well is provided.  
Its installation is described later.  If you have never used Emacs, 
it is suggested that you use the \fImined\fR profile.  
If you normally use Emacs, then
do not install the \fImined\fR profile.  You can also make your own using
\fIellec\fR.
There is no Mock Lisp.
.PP
ELLE has a character-oriented view of the world, not a line oriented
view, like \fIed\fR.  
It does not have magic characters for searching.
However, you can use line feed in search patterns.  
For example, to find a line consisting of the three characters
\*(OQfoo\*(CQ all by themselves on a line, using the mined
bindings (see below), use the pattern: CTRL-\\ CTRL-J f o o CTRL-\\ CTRL-J.
The CTRL-\ means to interpret the next character literally, in this case it
is CTRL-J, which is line feed.  You can also search for patterns involving 
multiple lines.  For example, to find a line ending in an \*(OQx\*(CQ followed by a
line beginning with a \*(OQy\*(CQ, use as pattern: x CTRL-\ CTRL-J y.
.SS "Mined Key Bindings"
.PP
These are the key bindings if the binary user profile, \fI.ellepro.b1\fR,
is installed in $HOME.  The ESCAPE key followed by a number followed by a
command causes that command to be executed \*(OQnumber\*(CQ times.  This applies
both to control characters and insertable characters.  CTRL-X refers to a
\*(OQcontrol character.\*(CQ  ESC x refers to an escape character 
followed by x.
In other words, ^X is a synonym for CTRL-X.
^X Y refers to CTRL-X followed by y.  To abort the current command and go
back to the main loop of the editor, type CTRL-G, rather than CTRL-\\.
.PP
Only a few commands are of the form CTRL-X Y.  All of these are also
bound to CTRL-X CTRL-Y, so you can hold down CTRL and then hit X Y, or
release control after the X, as you prefer.
.PP
The key bindings that are not listed should not be used.
Some of them actually do things.
For example, the ANSI escape codes ESC [ x are bound 
to ^X Y for a variety of y.
.PP
Some commands work on regions.
A region is defined as the text between the most recently set mark 
and the cursor.
.SP 0.5
.SS "Mined Commands"
.SP 0.5
.PP
If the \fImined\fR profile,
.I .ellepro.b1 
is installed in your home directory, the following commands will work.
.sp
.in +1.75i
.ta +1.25i
.ti -1.5i
\fBCURSOR MOTION\fR
.ti -1.25i
arrows	Move the cursor in the indicated direction
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-A	Move cursor to start of current line
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Z	Move cursor to end of current line
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-F	Move cursor forward word 
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-B	Move cursor backward to start of previous word 
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBSCREEN MOTION\fR
.ti -1.25i
Home key	Move to first character of the file
.ti -1.25i
End key	Move to last character of the file
.ti -1.25i
PgUp key	Scroll window up 22 lines (closer to start of the file)
.ti -1.25i
PgDn key	Scroll window down 22 lines (closer to end of the file)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-U	Scroll window up 1 line
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-D	Scroll window down 1 line
.ti -1.25i
ESC ,	Move to top of screen
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-_	Move to bottom of screen
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMODIFYING TEXT\fR
.ti -1.25i
DEL key	Delete the character under the cursor
.ti -1.25i
Backsp	Delete the character to left of the cursor
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-N	Delete the next word
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-P	Delete the previous word
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-T	Delete tail of line (all characters from cursor to end of line)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-O	Open up the line (insert line feed and back up)
.ti -1.25i
ESC G	Get and insert a file at the cursor position (CTRL-G in mined)
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBREGIONS\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-^	Set mark at current position for use with CTRL-C and CTRL-K
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-C	Copy the text between the mark and the cursor into the buffer
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-K	Delete text between mark and cursor; also copy it to the buffer
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Y	Yank contents of the buffer out and insert it at the cursor
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMISCELLANEOUS\fR
.ti -1.25i
numeric +	Search forward (prompts for expression)
.ti -1.25i
numeric \(mi	Search backward (prompts for expression)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-]	ESC n CTRL-[ goes to line n (slightly different syntax than mined)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-R	Global replace pattern with string (from cursor to end)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-L	Replace pattern with string within the current line only
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-W	Write the edited file back to the disk
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-S	Fork off a shell (use CTRL-D to get back to the editor)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-G	Abort whatever the editor was doing and wait for command (CTRL-\)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-E	Redraw screen with cursor line positioned in the middle
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-V	Visit (edit) a new file
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Q	Write buffer to a file
.ti -1.25i
ESC X	Exit the editor
.SP 0.5
.in -1.75i
.SS "Non-Mined Commands"
.LP
.SP 0.5
.in +1.75i
.ta +1.25i
.ti -1.5i
\fBCURSOR MOTION\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC P	Forward paragraph (a paragraph is a line beginning with a dot)
.ti -1.25i
ESC ]	Backward paragraph
.ti -1.25i
ESC .	Indent this line as much as the previous one
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMODIFYING TEXT\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-\\	Insert the next character (used for inserting control characters)
.ti -1.25i
ESC T	Transpose characters
.ti -1.25i
ESC W	Transpose words
.ti -1.25i
ESC =	Delete white space (horizontal space)
.ti -1.25i
ESC |	Delete blank lines (vertical space)
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBREGIONS\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC M	Mark current paragraph
.ti -1.25i
ESC ^	Exchange cursor and mark
.ti -1.25i
ESC Y	Yank back the next-to-the-last kill (CTRL-Y yanks the last one)
.ti -1.25i
ESC A	Append next kill to kill buffer
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBKEYBOARD MACROS\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC /	Start Keyboard Macro
.ti -1.25i
ESC \\	End Keyboard Macro
.ti -1.25i
ESC *	View Keyboard Macro (the PrtSc key on the numeric pad is also a *)
.ti -1.25i
ESC E	Execute Keyboard Macro
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBWINDOW MANAGEMENT\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X 1	Enter one window mode
.ti -1.25i
^X 2	Enter two window mode
.ti -1.25i
^X L	Make the current window larger
.ti -1.25i
^X P	Make the window more petit/petite (Yes, Virginia, they are English)
.ti -1.25i
^X N	Next window
.ti -1.25i
^X W	New window
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBBUFFER MANAGEMENT\fR
.ti -1.25i
numeric 5	Display the list of current files and buffers
.ti -1.25i
ESC B	Select a buffer
.ti -1.25i
ESC S	Select an existing buffer
.ti -1.25i
ESC N	Mark a buffer as NOT modified (even if it really is)
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBUPPER AND LOW CASE MANIPULATION\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC I	Set first character of word to upper case
.ti -1.25i
ESC C	Capitalize current word
.ti -1.25i
ESC O	Make current word ordinary (i.e., lower case)
.ti -1.25i
ESC U	Set entire region between mark and cursor to upper case
.ti -1.25i
ESC L	Set entire region between mark and cursor to lower case
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMISCELLANEOUS\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC F	Find file and read it into its own buffer
.ti -1.25i
ESC Z	Incremental search
.ti -1.25i
ESC Q	Like CTRL-R, but queries at each occurrence (type ? for options)
.ti -1.25i
ESC R	Reset the user profile from a file
.ti -1.25i
ESC H	Help (ELLE prompts for the 1 or 2 character command to describe)
.ti -1.25i
ESC ;	Insert a comment in a C program (generates /* */ for you)
.ti -1.25i
^X X	Exit the editor (same as ESC X and CTRL-X CTRL-X)
.in -1.75i
.fi
.sp
The major differences between ELLE 
with the \fImined\fR profile and \fImined\fR itself are:
.sp
.nf
.in +0.25i
1. The definition of a \*(OQword\*(CQ is different for forward and backward word
2. The mark is set with CTRL-^ instead of CTRL-@
3. Use CTRL-G to abort a command instead of CTRL-\\
4. Use CTRL-\ to literally insert the next character, instead of ALT
5. CTRL-E adjusts the window to put the cursor in the middle of it
6. To get and insert a file, use ESC G instead of CTRL-G
7. To go to line n, type ESC n CTRL-[ instead of CTRL-[ n
8. You exit with CTRL-X CTRL-X and then answer the question with \*(OQy\*(CQ.
9. There are many new commands, windows, larger files, etc.
.fi
.in -0.25i
.sp
.SS "Emacs Key Bindings"
.PP
If you do not have the \fImined\fR profile installed, you get the standard
Emacs key bindings.
These are listed below. 
Commands not listed are not implemented.
.sp
.in +1.75i
.ta +1.25i
.ti -1.5i
\fBCURSOR MOVEMENT\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-F	Forward one character.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-B	Backward one character.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-H	Same as CTRL-B: move backward one character.
.ti -1.25i
ESC F	Forward one word.
.ti -1.25i
ESC B	Backward one word.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-A	Beginning of current line.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-E	End of current line.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-N	Next line (goes to the next line).
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-P	Previous line (goes to the previous line).
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-V	Beginning of next screenful.
.ti -1.25i
ESC V	Beginning of previous screenful.
.ti -1.25i
ESC ]~	Forward Paragraph.
.ti -1.25i
ESC [~	Backward Paragraph.
.ti -1.25i
ESC <	Beginning of whole buffer.
.ti -1.25i
ESC >	End of whole buffer.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBDELETING\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-D	Deletes forward one character (the one the cursor is under).
.ti -1.25i
DELETE	Deletes backward one character (the one to left of cursor).
.ti -1.25i
ESC D	Kills forward one word.
.ti -1.25i
ESC DEL	Kills backward one word.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-K	Kills the rest of the line (to the right of the cursor).
.ti -1.25i
ESC \\	Deletes spaces around the cursor.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-O	Deletes blank lines around the cursor.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBCASE CHANGE\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC C	Capitalizes word : first letter becomes uppercase; rest lower
.ti -1.25i
ESC L	Makes the whole next word lowercase.
.ti -1.25i
ESC U	Makes the whole next word uppercase.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-L	Makes whole region lowercase.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-U	Makes whole region uppercase.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBSEARCHING\fR (If no string is given, previous string is used)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-S	Incremental Search forward; prompts \*(OQI-search:\*(CQ
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-R	Reverse Incremental Search; prompts \*(OQR-search:\*(CQ
.HS
During an incremental search, the following characters have special effects:
.HS
.in +1.2i
.ta +1.0i +0.2i
.ti -1.2i
\*(OQnormal\*(CQ 	-	Begin searching immediately.
.ti -1.2i
^G	-	Cancel I-search, return to start.
.ti -1.2i
DEL	-	Erase last char, return to last match.
.ti -1.2i
^S, ^R	-	Repeat search (or change direction).
.ti -1.2i
ESC or CR	-	Exit I-search at current point.
.sp
.in -1.2i
.ta +1.25i
.ti -1.25i
ESC %	Query Replace. Interactive replace. Type \*(OQ?\*(CQ to see options.
.ti -1.25i
^X %	Replace String.	Like Query Replace, but not interactive
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMARKING AREAS\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-^	Set mark
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-X	Exchange cursor and mark.
.ti -1.25i
ESC H	Mark Paragraph. Sets mark and cursor to surround a para.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-W	Wipe-out -- kills a \*(OQregion\*(CQ:
.ti -1.25i
ESC W	Copy region. Like CTRL-W then CTRL-Y but modifies buffer
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Y	Yanks-back (un-kills) whatever you have most recently killed.
.ti -1.25i
ESC Y	Yanks-back (un-kills) the next most recently killed text.
.ti -1.25i
ESC CTRL-W	Append Next Kill. Accumulates stuff from several kills
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBFILLING TEXT\fR
.ti -1.25i
ESC Q	Fill the paragraph to the size of the Fill Column.
.ti -1.25i
ESC G	Fill the region.
.ti -1.25i
^X F	Set Fill Column. ESC Q will use this line size.
.ti -1.25i
^X .	Set Fill Prefix. Asks for prefix string 
.ti -1.25i
^X T	Toggles Auto Fill Mode.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBWINDOWS\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X 2	Make two windows (split screen).
.ti -1.25i
^X 1	Make one window (delete window) (make one screen).
.ti -1.25i
^X O	Go to Other window.
.ti -1.25i
^X ^	Grow window: makes current window bigger.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBBUFFERS\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-F	Find a file and make a buffer for it.
.ti -1.25i
^X B	Select Buffer: goes to specified buffer or makes new one
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-B	Show the names of the buffers used in this editing session.
.ti -1.25i
^X K	Kill Buffer.
.ti -1.25i
ESC tilde	Say buffer is not modified.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-M	Toggle EOL mode (per-buffer flag).
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBKEYBOARD MACRO\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X (	Start collecting a keyboard macro.
.ti -1.25i
^X )	Stop collecting.
.ti -1.25i
^X E	Execute the collected macro.
.ti -1.25i
^X *	Display the collected macro.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBFILES\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-I	Insert a file where cursor is.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-R	Read a new file into current buffer.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-V	Same as ^X ^R above (reads a file).
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-W	Write buffer out to new file name.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-S	Save file: write out buffer to its file name.
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-E	Write region out to new file name.
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBMISCELLANEOUS\fR
.ti -1.25i
^X CTRL-Z	Exit from ELLE.  
.ti -1.25i
^X !	Escape to shell (CTRL-D to return)
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-O	Open up line	
.ti -1.25i
LINEFEED	Same as typing RETURN and TAB.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-T	Transposes characters.
.ti -1.25i
ESC T	Transposes words.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-U	Makes the next command happen four times.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-U number	Makes the next command happen \*(OQnumber\*(CQ times.  
.ti -1.25i
ESC number	Same as CTRL-U number.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-L	Refreshes screen.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-U CTRL-L	Refresh only the line cursor is on.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-U n CTRL-L Change window so the cursor is on line n
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Q	Quote: insert the next character no matter what it is.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-G	Quit: use to avoid answering a question.
.ti -1.25i
ESC ;	Inserts comment (for writing C programs).
.ti -1.25i
ESC I	Inserts indentation equal to previous line.
.ti -1.25i
ESC M	Move to end of this line's indentation.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-_	Describe a command (if the command database is online)
.sp
.ti -1.5i
\fBUNUSED CONTROLS\fR
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-C	Not used.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-Z	Not used.
.ti -1.25i
CTRL-]	Not used.
.fi
.in -1.75i
.sp	
.SP 0.5
.SS "ELLE profile"
.PP
It is possible to create your own user profile.
The mechanism is different from Emacs, since ELLE does not have Mock Lisp.
Proceed as follows.
.LI
.IT
Modify \fI.ellepro.e\fR to suit your taste.
.IT
Install \fI.ellepro.e\fR in your home directory.
.IT
Type:
.HS
.Cx "ellec \(enProfile"
.HS
.IT
Check to see if \fI.ellepro.b1\fR has been created.
If it has, you are ready to go.
.LX
.SS "Author"
.PP
ELLE was written by Ken Harrenstien of SRI (klh@sri.com).
